Speech and Language Processing. Daniel Jurafsky & James H. Martin. Copyright © 2026. All rights reserved. Draft of January 6, 2026. CHAPTER Masked Language Models Larvatus prodeo [Masked, I go forward] Descartes In the previous two chapters we introduced the transformer and saw how to pretrain a transformer language model as a causal or left-to-right language model. In this chapter we’ll introduce a second paradigm for pretrained language models, the bidirectional transformer encoder, and the most widely-used version, the BERTBERT model (Devlin et al., 2019). This model is trained via masked language modeling, masked language modeling where instead of predicting the following word, we mask a word in the middle and ask the model to guess the word given the words on both sides. This method thus allows the model to see both the right and left context. We also introduced ﬁnetuning in the prior chapter. Here we describe a newﬁnetuning kind of ﬁnetuning, in which we take the transformer network learned by these pretrained models, add a neural net classiﬁer after the top layer of the network, and train it on some additional labeled data to perform some downstream task like named entity tagging or natural language inference. As before, the intuition is that the pretraining phase learns a language model that instantiates rich representations of word meaning, that thus enables the model to more easily learn (‘be ﬁnetuned to’) the requirements of a downstream language understanding task. This aspect of the pretrain-ﬁnetune paradigm is an instance of what is called transfer learning in ma-transfer learning chine learning: the method of acquiring knowledge from one task or domain, and then applying it (transferring it) to solve a new task. The second idea that we introduce in this chapter is the idea of contextual embeddings: representations for words in context. The methods of Chapter 5 like word2vec or GloVe learned a single vector embedding for each unique word w in the vocabulary. By contrast, with contextual embeddings, such as those learned by masked language models like BERT, each wordw will be represented by a different vector each time it appears in a different context. While the causal language models of Chapter 8 also use contextual embeddings, the embeddings created by masked language models seem to function particularly well as representations. 10.1 Bidirectional Transformer Encoders Let’s begin by introducing the bidirectional transformer encoder that underlies models like BERT and its descendants like RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019) or SpanBERT (Joshi et al., 2020). In Chapter 7 we introduced the idea of left-to-right language models that can be applied to autoregressive contextual generation problems like question answering or summarization, and in Chapter 8 we saw how to implement language models with causal (left-to-right) transformers. But this left-to-right nature of these models is also a limitation, because there are tasks for which it would be useful, when processing a token, to be able to peek at future tokens. This is especially true for sequence labeling tasks in which we want to tag each token with a label, such as the named entity tagging task we’ll introduce in Section 10.5, or tasks like part-of-speech tagging or parsing that come up in later chapters. The bidirectional encoders that we introduce here are a different kind of beast than causal models. The causal models of Chapter 8 are generative models, designed to easily generate the next token in a sequence. But the focus of bidirectional encoders is instead on computing contextualized representations of the input tokens. Bidirectional encoders use self-attention to map sequences of input embeddings (x1, ...,xn) to sequences of output embeddings of the same length (h1, ...,hn), where the output vectors have been contextualized using information from the entire input sequence. These output embeddings are contextualized representations of each input token that are useful across a range of applications where we need to do a classiﬁcation or a decision based on the token in context. Remember that we said the models of Chapter 8 are sometimes called decoderonly, because they correspond to the decoder part of the encoder-decoder model we will introduce in Chapter 12. By contrast, the masked language models of this chapter are sometimes called encoder-only, because they produce an encoding for each input token but generally aren’t used to produce running text by decoding/sampling. That’s an important point: masked language models are not used for generation. They are generally instead used for interpretative tasks. 10.1.1 The architecture for bidirectional masked models Let’s ﬁrst discuss the overall architecture. Bidirectional transformer-based language models differ in two ways from the causal transformers in the previous chapters. The ﬁrst is that the attention function isn’t causal; the attention for a token i can look at following tokens i + 1 and so on. The second is that the training is slightly different since we are predicting something in the middle of our text rather than at the end. We’ll discuss the ﬁrst here and the second in the following section. Fig. 10.1a, reproduced here from Chapter 8, shows the information ﬂow in the left-to-right approach of Chapter 8. The attention computation at each token is based on the preceding (and current) input tokens, ignoring potentially useful information located to the right of the token under consideration. Bidirectional encoders overcome this limitation by allowing the attention mechanism to range over the entire input, as shown in Fig. 10.1b. a) A causal self-attention layer b) A bidirectional self-attention layer attentionattentionattentionattentionattention a1 a2 a3 a4 a5 x3 x4 x5x1 x2 attentionattentionattentionattentionattention a1 a2 a3 a4 a5 x3 x4 x5x1 x2 Figure 10.1 (a) The causal transformer from Chapter 8, highlighting the attention computation at token 3. The attention value at each token is computed using only information seen earlier in the context. (b) Information ﬂow in a bidirectional attention model. In processing each token, the model attends to all inputs, both before and after the current one. So attention for token 3 can draw on information from following tokens. The implementation is very simple! We simply remove the attention masking step that we introduced in Eq. ??. Recall from Chapter 8 that we had to mask the QK⊺ matrix for causal transformers so that attention couldn’t look at future tokens 10.1 • B IDIRECTIONAL TRANSFORMER ENCODERS 3 (repeated from Eq. ?? for a single attention head): head = softmax ( mask (QK⊺ √dk )) V (10.1) q1•k1 q2•k1q2•k2 q4•k1q4•k2q4•k3q4•k4 q3•k1q3•k2q3•k3 N N −∞−∞ −∞−∞ −∞ −∞ q1•k1 q2•k1q2•k2 q4•k1q4•k2q4•k3q4•k4 q3•k1q3•k2q3•k3 N N q1•k2q1•k3q1•k4 q2•k3q2•k4 q3•k4 (a) (b) Figure 10.2 The N×N QK⊺ matrix showing the qi·k j values. (a) shows the upper-triangle portion of the comparisons matrix zeroed out (set to−∞, which the softmax will turn to zero), while (b) shows the unmasked version. Fig. 10.2 shows the masked version ofQK⊺ and the unmasked version. For bidirectional attention, we use the unmasked version of Fig. 10.2b. Thus the attention computation for bidirectional attention is exactly the same as Eq. 10.1 but with the mask removed: head = softmax (QK⊺ √dk ) V (10.2) Otherwise, the attention computation is identical to what we saw in Chapter 8, as is the transformer block architecture (the feedforward layer, layer norm, and so on). As in Chapter 8, the input is also a series of subword tokens, usually computed by one of the 3 popular tokenization algorithms (including the BPE algorithm that we already saw in Chapter 2 and two others, the WordPiece algorithm and the SentencePiece Unigram LM algorithm). That means every input sentence ﬁrst has to be tokenized, and all further processing takes place on subword tokens rather than words. This will require, as we’ll see in the third part of the textbook, that for some NLP tasks that require notions of words (like parsing) we will occasionally need to map subwords back to words. To make this more concrete, the original English-only bidirectional transformer encoder model, BERT (Devlin et al., 2019), consisted of the following: • An English-only subword vocabulary consisting of 30,000 tokens generated using the WordPiece algorithm (Schuster and Nakajima, 2012). • Input context window N=512 tokens, and model dimensionality d=768 • So X, the input to the model, is of shape [N× d] = [512× 768]. • L=12 layers of transformer blocks, each with A=12 (bidirectional) multihead attention layers. • The resulting model has about 100M parameters. The larger multilingual XLM-RoBERTa model, trained on 100 languages, has • A multilingual subword vocabulary with 250,000 tokens generated using the SentencePiece Unigram LM algorithm (Kudo and Richardson, 2018). • Input context window N=512 tokens, and model dimensionalityd=1024, hence X, the input to the model, is of shape [N× d] = [512× 1024]. • L=24 layers of transformer blocks, with A=16 multihead attention layers each • The resulting model has about 550M parameters. Note that 550M parameters is relatively small as large language models go (Llama 3 has 405B parameters, so is 3 orders of magnitude bigger). Indeed, masked language models tend to be much smaller than causal language models. 10.2 Training Bidirectional Encoders We trained causal transformer language models in Chapter 8 by making them iteratively predict the next word in a text. But eliminating the causal mask in attention makes the guess-the-next-word language modeling task trivial—the answer is directly available from the context—so we’re in need of a new training scheme. Instead of trying to predict the next word, the model learns to perform a ﬁll-in-theblank task, technically called the cloze task (Taylor, 1953). To see this, let’s returncloze task to the motivating example from Chapter 3. Instead of predicting which words are likely to come next in this example: The water of Walden Pond is so beautifully we’re asked to predict a missing item given the rest of the sentence. The of Walden Pond is so beautifully ... That is, given an input sequence with one or more elements missing, the learning task is to predict the missing elements. More precisely, during training the model is deprived of one or more tokens of an input sequence and must generate a probability distribution over the vocabulary for each of the missing items. We then use the crossentropy loss from each of the model’s predictions to drive the learning process. This approach can be generalized to any of a variety of methods that corrupt the training input and then asks the model to recover the original input. Examples of the kinds of manipulations that have been used include masks, substitutions, reorderings, deletions, and extraneous insertions into the training text. The general name for this kind of training is called denoising: we corrupt (add noise to) the input indenoising some way (by masking a word, or putting in an incorrect word) and the goal of the system is to remove the noise. 10.2.1 Masking Words Let’s describe theMasked Language Modeling (MLM) approach to training bidiMasked Language Modeling rectional encoders (Devlin et al., 2019). As with the language model training methods we’ve already seen,MLM uses unannotated text from a large corpus. In MLM training, the model is presented with a series of sentences from the training corpus in which a percentage of tokens (15% in the BERT model) have been randomly chosen to be manipulated by the masking procedure. Given an input sentence lunch was delicious and assume we randomly chose the 3rd token delicious to be manipulated, • 80% of the time: The token is replaced with the special vocabulary token named [MASK], e.g. lunch was delicious → lunch was [MASK] . 10.2 • T RAINING BIDIRECTIONAL ENCODERS 5 • 10% of the time: The token is replaced with another token, randomly sampled from the vocabulary based on token unigram probabilities. e.g. lunch was delicious → lunch was gasp . • 10% of the time: the token is left unchanged. e.g. lunch was delicious → lunch was delicious . We then train the model to guess the correct token for the manipulated tokens. Why the three possible manipulations? Adding the [MASK] token creates a mismatch between pretraining and downstream ﬁnetuning or inference, since when we employ the MLM model to perform a downstream task, we don’t use any[MASK] tokens. If we just replaced tokens with the [MASK], the model might only predict tokens when it sees a [MASK], but we want the model to try to always predict the input token. To train the model to make the prediction, the original input sequence is tokenized using a subword model and tokens are sampled to be manipulated. Word embeddings for all of the tokens in the input are retrieved from theE embedding matrix and combined with positional embeddings to form the input to the transformer, passed through the stack of bidirectional transformer blocks, and then the language modeling head. The MLM training objective is to predict the original inputs for each of the masked tokens and the cross-entropy loss from these predictions drives the training process for all the parameters in the model. That is, all of the input tokens play a role in the self-attention process, but only the sampled tokens are used for learning. LM Head with Softmax over Vocabulary So [mask] and [mask] for long thanks CE Loss all apricot ﬁsh the Token + Positional Embeddings So long and thanks for all ﬁshthe Bidirectional Transformer Encoder + p1 + + + + + + + p2 p3 p4 p5 p6 p7 p8 hL 1 hL 2 hL 3 hL 4 hL 5 hL 6 hL 7 hL Figure 10.3 Masked language model training. In this example, three of the input tokens are selected, two of which are masked and the third is replaced with an unrelated word. The probabilities assigned by the model to these three items are used as the training loss. The other 5 tokens don’t play a role in training loss. Fig. 10.3 illustrates this approach with a simple example. Here,long, thanks and the have been sampled from the training sequence, with the ﬁrst two masked andthe replaced with the randomly sampled token apricot. The resulting embeddings are passed through a stack of bidirectional transformer blocks. Recall from Section ?? in Chapter 8 that to produce a probability distribution over the vocabulary for each of the masked tokens, the language modeling head takes the output vector hL i from the ﬁnal transformer layer L for each masked token i, multiplies it by the unembedding layer ET to produce the logits u, and then uses softmax to turn the logits into probabilities y over the vocabulary: ui = hL i ET (10.3) yi = softmax(ui) (10.4) With a predicted probability distribution for each masked item, we can use crossentropy to compute the loss for each masked item—the negative log probability assigned to the actual masked word, as shown in Fig. 10.3. More formally, for a given vector of input tokens in a sentence or batch x, let the set of tokens that are masked be M, the version of that sentence with some tokens replaced by masks be xmask, and the sequence of output vectors be h. For a given input token xi, such as the word long in Fig. 10.3, the loss is the probability of the correct word long, given xmask (as summarized in the single output vector hL i ): LMLM (xi) =−logP(xi|hL i ) The gradients that form the basis for the weight updates are based on the average loss over the sampled learning items from a single training sequence (or batch of sequences). LMLM =− 1 |M| ∑ i∈M logP(xi|hL i ) Note that only the tokens in M play a role in learning; the other words play no role in the loss function, so in that sense BERT and its descendents are inefﬁcient; only 15% of the input samples in the training data are actually used for training weights.1 10.2.2 Next Sentence Prediction The focus of mask-based learning is on predicting words from surrounding contexts with the goal of producing effective word-level representations. However, an important class of applications involves determining the relationship between pairs of sentences. These include tasks like paraphrase detection (detecting if two sentences have similar meanings), entailment (detecting if the meanings of two sentences entail or contradict each other) or discourse coherence (deciding if two neighboring sentences form a coherent discourse). To capture the kind of knowledge required for applications such as these, some models in the BERT family include a second learning objective called Next Sentence Prediction (NSP). In this task, the model is presented with pairs of sentencesNext Sentence Prediction and is asked to predict whether each pair consists of an actual pair of adjacent sentences from the training corpus or a pair of unrelated sentences. In BERT, 50% of the training pairs consisted of positive pairs, and in the other 50% the second sentence of a pair was randomly selected from elsewhere in the corpus. The NSP loss is based on how well the model can distinguish true pairs from random pairs. To facilitate NSP training, BERT introduces two special tokens to the input representation (tokens that will prove useful for ﬁnetuning as well). After tokenizing the input with the subword model, the token [CLS] is prepended to the input sentence pair, and the token [SEP] is placed between the sentences and after the ﬁnal token of the second sentence. There are actually two more special tokens, a ‘First Segment’ token, and a ‘Second Segment’ token. These tokens are added in the input stage to the word and positional embeddings. That is, each token of the input 1 ELECTRA, another BERT family member, does use all examples for training (Clark et al., 2020). 10.2 • T RAINING BIDIRECTIONAL ENCODERS 7 X is actually formed by summing 3 embeddings: word, position, and ﬁrst/second segment embeddings. During training, the output vector hL CLS from the ﬁnal layer associated with the [CLS] token represents the next sentence prediction. As with the MLM objective, we add a special head, in this case an NSP head, which consists of a learned set of classiﬁcation weights WNSP∈ Rd×2 that produces a two-class prediction from the raw [CLS] vector hL CLS: yi = softmax(hL CLSWNSP) Cross entropy is used to compute the NSP loss for each sentence pair presented to the model. Fig. 10.4 illustrates the overall NSP training setup. In BERT, the NSP loss was used in conjunction with the MLM training objective to form ﬁnal loss. Cancel my ﬂight [SEP] CE Loss And the Bidirectional Transformer Encoder p1 p2 p3 p4 p5 p6 p7 p8 [CLS] + + s1 NSP Head Token + Segment + Positional Embeddings hotel p9 [SEP] ++ s1 s1 s1 s1 s2 s2 s2 s2 + + + + + + + + + + + + + + hCLS Figure 10.4 An example of the NSP loss calculation. 10.2.3 Training Regimes BERT and other early transformer-based language models were trained on about 3.3 billion words (a combination of English Wikipedia and a corpus of book texts called BooksCorpus (Zhu et al., 2015) that is no longer used for intellectual property reasons). Modern masked language models are now trained on much larger datasets of web text, ﬁltered a bit, and augmented by higher-quality data like Wikipedia, the same as those we discussed for the causal large language models of Chapter 8. Multilingual models similarly use webtext and multilingual Wikipedia. For example the XLM-R model was trained on about 300 billion tokens in 100 languages, taken from the web via Common Crawl (https://commoncrawl.org/). To train the original BERT models, pairs of text segments were selected from the training corpus according to the next sentence prediction 50/50 scheme. Pairs were sampled so that their combined length was less than the 512 token input. Tokens within these sentence pairs were then masked using the MLM approach with the combined loss from the MLM and NSP objectives used for a ﬁnal loss. Because this ﬁnal loss is backpropagated through the entire transformer, the embeddings at each transformer layer will learn representations that are useful for predicting words from their neighbors. Since the [CLS] tokens are the direct input to the NSP classiﬁer, their learned representations will tend to contain information about the sequence as a whole. Approximately 40 passes (epochs) over the training data was required for the model to converge. Some models, like the RoBERTa model, drop the next sentence prediction objective, and therefore change the training regime a bit. Instead of sampling pairs of sentence, the input is simply a series of contiguous sentences, still beginning with the special [CLS] token. If the document runs out before 512 tokens are reached, an extra separator token is added, and sentences from the next document are packed in, until we reach a total of 512 tokens. Usually large batch sizes are used, between 8K and 32K tokens. Multilingual models have an additional decision to make: what data to use to build the vocabulary? Recall that all language models use subword tokenization (BPE or SentencePiece Unigram LM are the two most common algorithms). What text should be used to learn this multilingual tokenization, given that it’s easier to get much more text in some languages than others? One option would be to create this vocabulary-learning dataset by sampling sentences from our training data (perhaps web text from Common Crawl), randomly. In that case we will choose a lot of sentences from languages with lots of web representation like English, and the tokens will be biased toward rare English tokens instead of creating frequent tokens from languages with less data. Instead, it is common to divide the training data into subcorpora of N different languages, compute the number of sentences ni of each language i, and readjust these probabilities so as to upweight the probability of less-represented languages (Lample and Conneau, 2019). The new probability of selecting a sentence from each of the N languages (whose prior frequency is ni) is {qi}i=1...N, where: qi = pα i∑N j=1 pα j with pi = ni ∑N k=1 nk (10.5) Recall from Eq. ?? in Chapter 5 that an α value between 0 and 1 will give higher weight to lower probability samples. Conneau et al. (2020) show thatα = 0.3 works well to give rare languages more inclusion in the tokenization, resulting in better multilingual performance overall. The result of this pretraining process consists of both learned word embeddings, as well as all the parameters of the bidirectional encoder that are used to produce contextual embeddings for novel inputs. For many purposes, a pretrained multilingual model is more practical than a monolingual model, since it avoids the need to build many (a hundred!) separate monolingual models. And multilingual models can improve performance on lowresourced languages by leveraging linguistic information from a similar language in the training data that happens to have more resources. Nonetheless, when the number of languages grows very large, multilingual models exhibit what has been called the curse of multilinguality (Conneau et al., 2020): the performance on each language degrades compared to a model training on fewer languages. Another problem with multilingual models is that they ‘have an accent’: grammatical structures in higher-resource languages (often English) bleed into lower-resource languages; the vast amount of English language in training makes the model’s representations for low-resource languages slightly more English-like (Papadimitriou et al., 2023). 10.3 • C ONTEXTUAL EMBEDDINGS 9 10.3 Contextual Embeddings Given a pretrained language model and a novel input sentence, we can think of the sequence of model outputs as constitutingcontextual embeddings for each token incontextual embeddings the input. These contextual embeddings are vectors representing some aspect of the meaning of a token in context, and can be used for any task requiring the meaning of tokens or words. More formally, given a sequence of input tokens x1, ...,xn, we can use the output vector hLi from the ﬁnal layer L of the model as a representation of the meaning of token xi in the context of sentence x1, ...,xn. Or instead of just using the vector hLi from the ﬁnal layer of the model, it’s common to compute a representation for xi by averaging the output tokens hi from each of the last four layers of the model, i.e., hLi, hL−1i, hL−2i, and hL−3i. [CLS] So long and thanks for all hL 1hL CLS hL 2 hL 3 hL 4 hL 5 hL E i+ E i+ E i+ E i+ E i+ E i+ E i+ Figure 10.5 The output of a BERT-style model is a contextual embedding vector hL i for each input token xi. Just as we used static embeddings like word2vec in Chapter 5 to represent the meaning of words, we can use contextual embeddings as representations of word meanings in context for any task that might require a model of word meaning. Where static embeddings represent the meaning of wordtypes (vocabulary entries), contextual embeddings represent the meaning of word instances: instances of a particular word type in a particular context. Thus where word2vec had a single vector for each word type, contextual embeddings provide a single vector for each instance of that word type in its sentential context. Contextual embeddings can thus be used for tasks like measuring the semantic similarity of two words in context, and are useful in linguistic tasks that require models of word meaning. 10.3.1 Contextual Embeddings and Word Sense Words are ambiguous: the same word can be used to mean different things. Inambiguous Chapter 5 we saw that the word “mouse” can mean (1) a small rodent, or (2) a handoperated device to control a cursor. The word “bank” can mean: (1) a ﬁnancial institution or (2) a sloping mound. We say that the words ‘mouse’ or ‘bank’ are polysemous (from Greek ‘many senses’,poly‘many’ +sema, ‘sign, mark’).2 A sense (or word sense) is a discrete representation of one aspect of the meaningword sense of a word. We can represent each sense with a superscript: bank1 and bank2, mouse1 and mouse2. These senses can be found listed in online thesauruses (or thesauri) like WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998), which has datasets in many languagesWordNet listing the senses of many words. In context, it’s easy to see the different meanings: mouse1 : .... a mouse controlling a computer system in 1968. mouse2 : .... a quiet animal like a mouse bank1 : ...a bank can hold the investments in a custodial account ... bank2 : ...as agriculture burgeons on the east bank, the river ... This fact that context disambiguates the senses of mouse and bank above can also be visualized geometrically. Fig. 10.6 shows a two-dimensional projection of many instances of the BERT embeddings of the word die in English and German. Each point in the graph represents the use of die in one input sentence. We can clearly see at least two different English senses of die (the singular of dice and the verb to die, as well as the German article, in the BERT embedding space. Figure 4: Embeddings for the word "die" in different contexts, visualized with UMAP . Sample points are annotated with corresponding sentences. Overall annotations (blue text) are added as a guide. 4.1 Visualization of word senses Our ﬁrst experiment is an exploratory visualization of how word sense affects context embeddings. For data on different word senses, we collected all sentences used in the introductions to Englishlanguage Wikipedia articles. (Text outside of introductions was frequently fragmentary.) We created an interactive application, which we plan to make public. A user enters a word, and the system retrieves 1,000 sentences containing that word. It sends these sentences to BERT-base as input, and for each one it retrieves the context embedding for the word from a layer of the user’s choosing. The system visualizes these 1,000 context embeddings using UMAP [ 15], generally showing clear clusters relating to word senses. Different senses of a word are typically spatially separated, and within the clusters there is often further structure related to ﬁne shades of meaning. In Figure 4, for example, we not only see crisp, well-separated clusters for three meanings of the word “die,” but within one of these clusters there is a kind of quantitative scale, related to the number of people dying. See Appendix 6.4 for further examples. The apparent detail in the clusters we visualized raises two immediate questions. First, is it possible to ﬁnd quantitative corroboration that word senses are well-represented? Second, how can we resolve a seeming contradiction: in the previous section, we saw how position represented syntax; yet here we see position representing semantics. 4.2 Measurement of word sense disambiguation capability The crisp clusters seen in visualizations such as Figure 4 suggest that BERT may create simple, effective internal representations of word senses, putting different meanings in different locations. To test this hypothesis quantitatively, we test whether a simple classiﬁer on these internal representations can perform well at word-sense disambiguation (WSD). We follow the procedure described in [ 20], which performed a similar experiment with the ELMo model. For a given word with n senses, we make a nearest-neighbor classiﬁer where each neighbor is the centroid of a given word sense’s BERT-base embeddings in the training data. To classify a new word we ﬁnd the closest of these centroids, defaulting to the most commonly used sense if the word was not present in the training data. We used the data and evaluation from [ 21]: the training data was SemCor [17] (33,362 senses), and the testing data was the suite described in [21] (3,669 senses). The simple nearest-neighbor classiﬁer achieves an F1 score of 71.1, higher than the current state of the art (Table 1), with the accuracy monotonically increasing through the layers. This is a strong signal that context embeddings are representing word-sense information. Additionally, an even higher score of 71.5 was obtained using the technique described in the following section. Figure 10.6 Each blue dot shows a BERT contextual embedding for the word die from different sentences in English and German, projected into two dimensions with the UMAP algorithm. The German and English meanings and the different English senses fall into different clusters. Some sample points are shown with the contextual sentence they came from. Figure from Coenen et al. (2019). Thus while thesauruses like WordNet give discrete lists of senses, embeddings (whether static or contextual) offer a continuous high-dimensional model of meaning that, although it can be clustered, doesn’t divide up into fully discrete senses. Word Sense Disambiguation The task of selecting the correct sense for a word is calledword sense disambiguation, or WSD. WSD algorithms take as input a word in context and a ﬁxed inventoryword sense disambiguation WSD of potential word senses (like the ones in WordNet) and outputs the correct word sense in context. Fig. 10.7 sketches out the task. 2 The word polysemy itself is ambiguous; you may see it used in a different way, to refer only to cases where a word’s senses are related in some structured way, reserving the wordhomonymy to mean sense ambiguities with no relation between the senses (Haber and Poesio, 2020). Here we will use ‘polysemy’ to mean any kind of sense ambiguity, and ‘structured polysemy’ for polysemy with sense relations. 10.3 • C ONTEXTUAL EMBEDDINGS 11 anelectric guitarand bass player stand oﬀ tooneside electric1: using electricity electric2: tense electric3: thrilling guitar1 bass1: low range … bass4: sea ﬁsh … bass7: instrument … player1: in game player2: musician player3: actor … stand1: upright … stand5: bear … stand10: put upright … side1: relative region … side3: of body … side11: slope … x1 y1 x2 y2 x3 y3 y4 y5 y6 x4 x5 x6 Figure 10.7 The all-words WSD task, mapping from input words ( x) to WordNet senses (y). Figure inspired by Chaplot and Salakhutdinov (2018). WSD can be a useful analytic tool for text analysis in the humanities and social sciences, and word senses can play a role in model interpretability for word representations. Word senses also have interesting distributional properties. For example a word often is used in roughly the same sense through a discourse, an observation called the one sense per discourse rule (Gale et al., 1992).one sense per discourse The best performing WSD algorithm is a simple 1-nearest-neighbor algorithm using contextual word embeddings, due to Melamud et al. (2016) and Peters et al. (2018). At training time we pass each sentence in some sense-labeled dataset (like the SemCore or SenseEval datasets in various languages) through any contextual embedding (e.g., BERT) resulting in a contextual embedding for each labeled token. (There are various ways to compute this contextual embedding vi for a token i; for BERT it is common to pool multiple layers by summing the vector representations of i from the last four BERT layers). Then for each senses of any word in the corpus, for each of the n tokens of that sense, we average their n contextual representations vi to produce a contextual sense embedding vs for s: vs = 1 n ∑ i vi ∀vi∈ tokens(s) (10.6) At test time, given a token of a target word t in context, we compute its contextual embedding t and choose its nearest neighbor sense from the training set, i.e., the sense whose sense embedding has the highest cosine with t: sense(t) = argmax s∈senses(t) cosine(t,vs) (10.7) Fig. 10.8 illustrates the model. 10.3.2 Contextual Embeddings and Word Similarity In Chapter 5 we introduced the idea that we could measure the similarity of two words by considering how close they are geometrically, by using the cosine as a similarity function. The idea of meaning similarity is also clear geometrically in the meaning clusters in Fig. 10.6; the representation of a word which has a particular sense in a context is closer to other instances of the same sense of the word. Thus we I found the jar empty cI cfound find1 v cthecjar cempty find9 v find5 vfind4 v ENCODER Figure 10.8 The nearest-neighbor algorithm for WSD. In green are the contextual embeddings precomputed for each sense of each word; here we just show a few of the senses for ﬁnd. A contextual embedding is computed for the target word found, and then the nearest neighbor sense (in this case ﬁnd9v) is chosen. Figure inspired by Loureiro and Jorge (2019). often measure the similarity between two instances of two words in context (or two instances of the same word in two different contexts) by using the cosine between their contextual embeddings. Usually some transformations to the embeddings are required before computing cosine. This is because contextual embeddings (whether from masked language models or from autoregressive ones) have the property that the vectors for all words are extremely similar. If we look at the embeddings from the ﬁnal layer of BERT or other models, embeddings for instances of any two randomly chosen words will have extremely high cosines that can be quite close to 1, meaning all word vectors tend to point in the same direction. The property of vectors in a system all tending to point in the same direction is known as anisotropy. Ethayarajh (2019) deﬁnes the anisotropy of a model as the expected cosine similarity of any pair of words inanisotropy a corpus. The word ‘isotropy’ means uniformity in all directions, so in an isotropic model, the collection of vectors should point in all directions and the expected cosine between a pair of random embeddings would be zero. Timkey and van Schijndel (2021) show that one cause of anisotropy is that cosine measures are dominated by a small number of dimensions of the contextual embedding whose values are very different than the others: these rogue dimensions have very large magnitudes and very high variance. Timkey and van Schijndel (2021) shows that we can make the embeddings more isotropic by standardizing (z-scoring) the vectors, i.e., subtracting the mean and dividing by the variance. Given a set C of all the embeddings in some corpus, each with dimensionality d (i.e., x∈ Rd), the mean vector µ∈ Rd is: µ = 1 |C| ∑ x∈C x (10.8) The standard deviation in each dimension σ∈ Rd is: σ = √ |C| ∑ x∈C (x− µ)2 (10.9) Then each word vector x is replaced by a standardized version z: z = x− µ σ (10.10) 10.4 • F INE -T UNING FOR CLASSIFICATION 13 One problem with cosine that is not solved by standardization is that cosine tends to underestimate human judgments on similarity of word meaning for very frequent words (Zhou et al., 2022). 10.4 Fine-Tuning for Classiﬁcation The power of pretrained language models lies in their ability to extract generalizations from large amounts of text—generalizations that are useful for myriad downstream applications. There are two ways to make practical use of the generalizations to solve downstream tasks. The most common way is to use natural language to prompt the model, putting it in a state where it contextually generates what we want. In this section we explore an alternative way to use pretrained language models for downstream applications: a version of the ﬁnetuning paradigm from Chapter 7.ﬁnetuning In the kind of ﬁnetuning used for masked language models, we add applicationspeciﬁc circuitry (often called a special head) on top of pretrained models, taking their output as its input. The ﬁnetuning process consists of using labeled data about the application to train these additional application-speciﬁc parameters. Typically, this training will either freeze or make only minimal adjustments to the pretrained language model parameters. The following sections introduce ﬁnetuning methods for the most common kinds of applications: sequence classiﬁcation, sentence-pair classiﬁcation, and sequence labeling. 10.4.1 Sequence Classiﬁcation The task of sequence classiﬁcation is to classify an entire sequence of text with a single label. This set of tasks is commonly called text classiﬁcation, like sentiment analysis or spam detection (Appendix K) in which we classify a text into two or three classes (like positive or negative), as well as classiﬁcation tasks with a large number of categories, like document-level topic classiﬁcation. For sequence classiﬁcation we represent the entire input to be classiﬁed by a single vector. We can represent a sequence in various ways. One way is to take the sum or the mean of the last output vector from each token in the sequence. For BERT, we instead add a new unique token to the vocabulary called [CLS], and prepended it to the start of all input sequences, both during pretraining and encoding. The output vector in the ﬁnal layer of the model for the [CLS] input represents the entire input sequence and serves as the input to a classiﬁer head , a logisticclassiﬁer head regression or neural network classiﬁer that makes the relevant decision. As an example, let’s return to the problem of sentiment classiﬁcation. Finetuning a classiﬁer for this application involves learning a set of weights, WC, to map the output vector for the [CLS] token— hL CLS—to a set of scores over the possible sentiment classes. Assuming a three-way sentiment classiﬁcation task (positive, negative, neutral) and dimensionality d as the model dimension,WC will be of size[d×3]. To classify a document, we pass the input text through the pretrained language model to generate hL CLS, multiply it by WC, and pass the resulting vector through a softmax. y = softmax(hL CLSWC) (10.11) Finetuning the values inWC requires supervised training data consisting of input sequences labeled with the appropriate sentiment class. Training proceeds in the usual way; cross-entropy loss between the softmax output and the correct answer is used to drive the learning that produces WC. This loss can be used to not only learn the weights of the classiﬁer, but also to update the weights for the pretrained language model itself. In practice, reasonable classiﬁcation performance is typically achieved with only minimal changes to the language model parameters, often limited to updates over the ﬁnal few layers of the transformer. Fig. 10.9 illustrates this overall approach to sequence classiﬁcation. [CLS] entirelypredictableand lacks energy Bidirectional Transformer Encoder hCLS E i+ E i+ E i+ E i+ E i+ E i+ sentiment classiﬁcation head WC y Figure 10.9 Sequence classiﬁcation with a bidirectional transformer encoder. The output vector for the [CLS] token serves as input to a simple classiﬁer. 10.4.2 Sequence-Pair Classiﬁcation As mentioned in Section 10.2.2, an important type of problem involves the classiﬁcation of pairs of input sequences. Practical applications that fall into this class include paraphrase detection (are the two sentences paraphrases of each other?), logical entailment (does sentence A logically entail sentence B?), and discourse coherence (how coherent is sentence B as a follow-on to sentence A?). Fine-tuning an application for one of these tasks proceeds just as with pretraining using the NSP objective. During ﬁnetuning, pairs of labeled sentences from a supervised ﬁnetuning set are presented to the model, and run through all the layers of the model to produce the h outputs for each input token. As with sequence classiﬁcation, the output vector associated with the prepended [CLS] token represents the model’s view of the input pair. And as with NSP training, the two inputs are separated by the [SEP] token. To perform classiﬁcation, the [CLS] vector is multiplied by a set of learned classiﬁcation weights and passed through a softmax to generate label predictions, which are then used to update the weights. As an example, let’s consider an entailment classiﬁcation task with the MultiGenre Natural Language Inference (MultiNLI) dataset (Williams et al., 2018). In the task of natural language inference or NLI, also called recognizing textual natural language inference entailment, a model is presented with a pair of sentences and must classify the relationship between their meanings. For example in the MultiNLI corpus, pairs of sentences are given one of 3 labels: entails, contradicts and neutral. These labels 10.5 • F INE -T UNING FOR SEQUENCE LABELING : N AMED ENTITY RECOGNITION 15 describe a relationship between the meaning of the ﬁrst sentence (the premise) and the meaning of the second sentence (the hypothesis). Here are representative examples of each class from the corpus: • Neutral a: Jon walked back to the town to the smithy. b: Jon traveled back to his hometown. • Contradicts a: Tourist Information ofﬁces can be very helpful. b: Tourist Information ofﬁces are never of any help. • Entails a: I’m confused. b: Not all of it is very clear to me. A relationship of contradicts means that the premise contradicts the hypothesis; entails means that the premise entails the hypothesis; neutral means that neither is necessarily true. The meaning of these labels is looser than strict logical entailment or contradiction indicating that a typical human reading the sentences would most likely interpret the meanings in this way. To ﬁnetune a classiﬁer for the MultiNLI task, we pass the premise/hypothesis pairs through a bidirectional encoder as described above and use the output vector for the [CLS] token as the input to the classiﬁcation head. As with ordinary sequence classiﬁcation, this head provides the input to a three-way classiﬁer that can be trained on the MultiNLI training corpus. 10.5 Fine-Tuning for Sequence Labeling: Named Entity Recognition In sequence labeling, the network’s task is to assign a label chosen from a small ﬁxed set of labels to each token in the sequence. One of the most common sequence labeling task is named entity recognition. 10.5.1 Named Entities A named entity is, roughly speaking, anything that can be referred to with a propernamed entity name: a person, a location, an organization. The task of named entity recognitionnamed entity recognition (NER) is to ﬁnd spans of text that constitute proper names and tag the type of theNER entity. Four entity tags are most common: PER (person), LOC (location), ORG (organization), or GPE (geo-political entity). However, the term named entity is commonly extended to include things that aren’t entities per se, including temporal expressions like dates and times, and even numerical expressions like prices. Here’s an example of the output of an NER tagger: Citing high fuel prices, [ ORG United Airlines] said [ TIME Friday] it has increased fares by [ MONEY $6] per round trip on ﬂights to some cities also served by lower-cost carriers. [ ORG American Airlines], a unit of [ORG AMR Corp.], immediately matched the move, spokesman [PER Tim Wagner] said. [ ORG United], a unit of [ORG UAL Corp.], said the increase took effect [ TIME Thursday] and applies to most routes where it competes against discount carriers, such as [LOC Chicago] to [LOC Dallas] and [LOC Denver] to [LOC San Francisco]. The text contains 13 mentions of named entities including 5 organizations, 4 locations, 2 times, 1 person, and 1 mention of money. Figure 10.10 shows typical generic named entity types. Many applications will also need to use speciﬁc entity types like proteins, genes, commercial products, or works of art. Type Tag Sample Categories Example sentences People PER people, characters Turing is a giant of computer science. Organization ORG companies, sports teams The IPCC warned about the cyclone. Location LOC regions, mountains, seas Mt. Sanitas is in Sunshine Canyon. Geo-Political Entity GPE countries, states Palo Alto is raising the fees for parking. Figure 10.10 A list of generic named entity types with the kinds of entities they refer to. Named entity recognition is a useful step in various natural language processing tasks, including linking text to information in structured knowledge sources like Wikipedia, measuring sentiment or attitudes toward a particular entity in text, or even as part of anonymizing text for privacy. The NER task is difﬁcult because of the ambiguity of segmenting NER spans, ﬁguring out which tokens are entities and which aren’t, since most words in a text will not be named entities. Another difﬁculty is caused by type ambiguity. The mention Washington can refer to a person, a sports team, a city, or the US government, as we see in Fig. 10.11. [PER Washington] was born into slavery on the farm of James Burroughs. [ORG Washington] went up 2 games to 1 in the four-game series. Blair arrived in [LOC Washington] for what may well be his last state visit. In June, [GPE Washington] passed a primary seatbelt law. Figure 10.11 Examples of type ambiguities in the use of the name Washington. 10.5.2 BIO Tagging One standard approach to sequence labeling for a span-recognition problem like NER is BIO tagging (Ramshaw and Marcus, 1995). This is a method that allows usBIO tagging to treat NER like a word-by-word sequence labeling task, via tags that capture both the boundary and the named entity type. Consider the following sentence: [PER Jane Villanueva ] of [ ORG United] , a unit of [ ORG United Airlines Holding] , said the fare applies to the [LOC Chicago ] route. Figure 10.12 shows the same excerpt represented with BIO tagging, as wellBIO as variants called IO tagging and BIOES tagging. In BIO tagging we label any token that begins a span of interest with the label B, tokens that occur inside a span are tagged with an I, and any tokens outside of any span of interest are labeled O. While there is only one O tag, we’ll have distinctB and I tags for each named entity class. The number of tags is thus 2n + 1, where n is the number of entity types. BIO tagging can represent exactly the same information as the bracketed notation, but has the advantage that we can represent the task in the same simple sequence modeling way as part-of-speech tagging: assigning a single label yi to each input word xi: We’ve also shown two variant tagging schemes: IO tagging, which loses some information by eliminating the B tag, and BIOES tagging, which adds an end tag E for the end of a span, and a span tag S for a span consisting of only one word. 10.5 • F INE -T UNING FOR SEQUENCE LABELING : N AMED ENTITY RECOGNITION 17 Words IO Label BIO Label BIOES Label Jane I-PER B-PER B-PER Villanueva I-PER I-PER E-PER of O O O United I-ORG B-ORG B-ORG Airlines I-ORG I-ORG I-ORG Holding I-ORG I-ORG E-ORG discussed O O O the O O O Chicago I-LOC B-LOC S-LOC route O O O . O O O Figure 10.12 NER as a sequence model, showing IO, BIO, and BIOES taggings. 10.5.3 Sequence Labeling In sequence labeling, we pass the ﬁnal output vector corresponding to each input token to a classiﬁer that produces a softmax distribution over the possible set of tags. For a single feedforward layer classiﬁer, the set of weights to be learned is WK of size [d× k], where k is the number of possible tags for the task. A greedy approach, where the argmax tag for each token is taken as a likely answer, can be used to generate the ﬁnal output tag sequence. Fig. 10.13 illustrates an example of this approach, where yi is a vector of probabilities over tags, and k indexes the tags. yi = softmax(hL i WK) (10.12) ti = argmaxk(yi) (10.13) Alternatively, the distribution over labels provided by the softmax for each input token can be passed to a conditional random ﬁeld (CRF) layer which can take global tag-level transitions into account (see Chapter 17 on CRFs). [CLS] JaneVillanueva of UnitedAirlines Bidirectional Transformer Encoder B-PERI-PER O B-ORGI-ORG Holdingdiscussed I-ORG O WK NER head hi argmax E i+ E i+ E i+ E i+ E i+ E i+ E i+ E i+ WK WK WK WK WK WK yi Figure 10.13 Sequence labeling for named entity recognition with a bidirectional transformer encoder. The output vector for each input token is passed to a simple k-way classiﬁer. Tokenization and NER Note that supervised training data for NER is typically in the form of BIO tags associated with text segmented at the word level. For example the following sentence containing two named entities: [LOC Mt. Sanitas ] is in [LOC Sunshine Canyon] . would have the following set of per-word BIO tags. (10.14) Mt. B-LOC Sanitas I-LOC is O in O Sunshine B-LOC Canyon I-LOC . O Unfortunately, the sequence of WordPiece tokens for this sentence doesn’t align directly with BIO tags in the annotation: ’Mt’, ’.’, ’San’, ’##itas’, ’is’, ’in’, ’Sunshine’, ’Canyon’ ’.’ To deal with this misalignment, we need a way to assign BIO tags to subword tokens during training and a corresponding way to recover word-level tags from subwords during decoding. For training, we can just assign the gold-standard tag associated with each word to all of the subword tokens derived from it. For decoding, the simplest approach is to use the argmax BIO tag associated with the ﬁrst subword token of a word. Thus, in our example, the BIO tag assigned to “Mt” would be assigned to “Mt.” and the tag assigned to “San” would be assigned to “Sanitas”, effectively ignoring the information in the tags assigned to “.” and “##itas”. More complex approaches combine the distribution of tag probabilities across the subwords in an attempt to ﬁnd an optimal word-level tag. 10.5.4 Evaluating Named Entity Recognition Named entity recognizers are evaluated by recall, precision, and F1 measure. Recall that recall is the ratio of the number of correctly labeled responses to the total that should have been labeled; precision is the ratio of the number of correctly labeled responses to the total labeled; and F 1 measure is the harmonic mean of the two. To know if the difference between the F1 scores of two NER systems is a significant difference, we use the paired bootstrap test, or the similar randomization test (Section ??). For named entity tagging, the entity rather than the word is the unit of response. Thus in the example in Fig. 10.12, the two entities Jane Villanueva and United Airlines Holding and the non-entity discussed would each count as a single response. The fact that named entity tagging has a segmentation component which is not present in tasks like text categorization or part-of-speech tagging causes some problems with evaluation. For example, a system that labeled Jane but not Jane Villanueva as a person would cause two errors, a false positive for O and a false negative for I-PER. In addition, using entities as the unit of response but words as the unit of training means that there is a mismatch between the training and test conditions. 10.6 Summary This chapter has introduced the bidirectional encoder and the masked language model. Here’s a summary of the main points that we covered: HISTORICAL NOTES 19 • Bidirectional encoders can be used to generate contextualized representations of input embeddings using the entire input context. • Pretrained language models based on bidirectional encoders can be learned using a masked language model objective where a model is trained to guess the missing information from an input. • The vector output of each transformer block or component in a particular token column is a contextual embedding that represents some aspect of the meaning of a token in context. • A word sense is a discrete representation of one aspect of the meaning of a word. Contextual embeddings offer a continuous high-dimensional model of meaning that is richer than fully discrete senses. • The cosine between contextual embeddings can be used as one way to model the similarity between two words in context, although some transformations to the embeddings are required ﬁrst. • Pretrained language models can be ﬁnetuned for speciﬁc applications by adding lightweight classiﬁer layers on top of the outputs of the pretrained model. • These applications can include sequence classiﬁcation tasks like sentiment analysis, sequence-pair classiﬁcation tasks like natural language inference, or sequence labeling tasks like named entity recognition. Historical Notes History TBD. Chaplot, D. S. and R. Salakhutdinov. 2018. Knowledgebased word sense disambiguation using topic models. AAAI. Clark, K., M.-T. Luong, Q. V . Le, and C. D. Manning. 2020. Electra: Pre-training text encoders as discriminators rather than generators. ICLR. Coenen, A., E. Reif, A. Yuan, B. Kim, A. Pearce, F. Vi´egas, and M. Wattenberg. 2019. Visualizing and measuring the geometry of bert. NeurIPS. Conneau, A., K. Khandelwal, N. Goyal, V . Chaudhary, G. Wenzek, F. Guzm´an, E. Grave, M. Ott, L. Zettlemoyer, and V . Stoyanov. 2020. Unsupervised cross-lingual representation learning at scale. ACL. Devlin, J., M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. NAACL HLT. Ethayarajh, K. 2019. How contextual are contextualized word representations? Comparing the geometry of BERT, ELMo, and GPT-2 embeddings. EMNLP. Fellbaum, C., ed. 1998. WordNet: An Electronic Lexical Database. MIT Press. Gale, W. A., K. W. Church, and D. Yarowsky. 1992. One sense per discourse. HLT. Haber, J. and M. Poesio. 2020. Assessing polyseme sense similarity through co-predication acceptability and contextualised embedding distance. *SEM. Joshi, M., D. Chen, Y . Liu, D. S. Weld, L. Zettlemoyer, and O. Levy. 2020. SpanBERT: Improving pre-training by representing and predicting spans. TACL, 8:64–77. Kudo, T. and J. Richardson. 2018. SentencePiece: A simple and language independent subword tokenizer and detokenizer for neural text processing. EMNLP. Lample, G. and A. Conneau. 2019. Cross-lingual language model pretraining. NeurIPS, volume 32. Liu, Y ., M. Ott, N. Goyal, J. Du, M. Joshi, D. Chen, O. Levy, M. Lewis, L. Zettlemoyer, and V . Stoyanov. 2019. RoBERTa: A robustly optimized BERT pretraining approach. ArXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692. Loureiro, D. and A. Jorge. 2019. Language modelling makes sense: Propagating representations through WordNet for full-coverage word sense disambiguation. ACL. Melamud, O., J. Goldberger, and I. Dagan. 2016. context2vec: Learning generic context embedding with bidirectional LSTM. CoNLL. Papadimitriou, I., K. Lopez, and D. Jurafsky. 2023. Multilingual BERT has an accent: Evaluating English inﬂuences on ﬂuency in multilingual models. EACL Findings. Peters, M., M. Neumann, M. Iyyer, M. Gardner, C. Clark, K. Lee, and L. Zettlemoyer. 2018. Deep contextualized word representations. NAACL HLT. Ramshaw, L. A. and M. P. Marcus. 1995. Text chunking using transformation-based learning. Proceedings of the 3rd Annual Workshop on Very Large Corpora. Schuster, M. and K. Nakajima. 2012. Japanese and Korean voice search. ICASSP. Taylor, W. L. 1953. Cloze procedure: A new tool for measuring readability. Journalism Quarterly, 30:415–433. Timkey, W. and M. van Schijndel. 2021. All bark and no bite: Rogue dimensions in transformer language models obscure representational quality. EMNLP. Williams, A., N. Nangia, and S. Bowman. 2018. A broadcoverage challenge corpus for sentence understanding through inference. NAACL HLT. Zhou, K., K. Ethayarajh, D. Card, and D. Jurafsky. 2022. Problems with cosine as a measure of embedding similarity for high frequency words. ACL. Zhu, Y ., R. Kiros, R. Zemel, R. Salakhutdinov, R. Urtasun, A. Torralba, and S. Fidler. 2015. Aligning books and movies: Towards story-like visual explanations by watching movies and reading books. IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision.