Speech and Language Processing. Daniel Jurafsky & James H. Martin. Copyright © 2026. All rights reserved. Draft of January 6, 2026. CHAPTER Discourse Coherence And even in our wildest and most wandering reveries, nay in our very dreams, we shall ﬁnd, if we reﬂect, that the imagination ran not altogether at adventures, but that there was still a connection upheld among the different ideas, which succeeded each other. Were the loosest and freest conversation to be transcribed, there would immediately be transcribed, there would immediately be observed something which connected it in all its transitions. David Hume, An enquiry concerning human understanding, 1748 Orson Welles’ movieCitizen Kane was groundbreaking in many ways, perhaps most notably in its structure. The story of the life of ﬁctional media magnate Charles Foster Kane, the movie does not proceed in chronological order through Kane’s life. Instead, the ﬁlm begins with Kane’s death (famously murmuring “Rosebud”) and is structured around ﬂashbacks to his life inserted among scenes of a reporter investigating his death. The novel idea that the structure of a movie does not have to linearly follow the structure of the real timeline made apparent for 20th century cinematography the inﬁnite possibilities and impact of different kinds of coherent narrative structures. But coherent structure is not just a fact about movies or works of art. Like movies, language does not normally consist of isolated, unrelated sentences, but instead of collocated, structured, coherent groups of sentences. We refer to such a coherent structured group of sentences as a discourse, and we use the word co-discourse herence to refer to the relationship between sentences that makes real discoursescoherence different than just random assemblages of sentences. The chapter you are now reading is an example of a discourse, as is a news article, a conversation, a thread on social media, a Wikipedia page, and your favorite novel. What makes a discourse coherent? If you created a text by taking random sentences each from many different sources and pasted them together, would that be a coherent discourse? Almost certainly not. Real discourses exhibit both local coher-local ence and global coherence. Let’s consider three ways in which real discourses areglobal locally coherent; First, sentences or clauses in real discourses are related to nearby sentences in systematic ways. Consider this example from Hobbs (1979): (24.1) John took a train from Paris to Istanbul. He likes spinach. This sequence is incoherent because it is unclear to a reader why the second sentence follows the ﬁrst; what does liking spinach have to do with train trips? In fact, a reader might go to some effort to try to ﬁgure out how the discourse could be coherent; perhaps there is a French spinach shortage? The very fact that hearers try to identify such connections suggests that human discourse comprehension involves the need to establish this kind of coherence. By contrast, in the following coherent example: (24.2) Jane took a train from Paris to Istanbul. She had to attend a conference. the second sentence gives a REASON for Jane’s action in the ﬁrst sentence. Structured relationships like REASON that hold between text units are called coherence relations, and coherent discourses are structured by many such coherence relations.coherence relations Coherence relations are introduced in Section 24.1. A second way a discourse can be locally coherent is by virtue of being “about” someone or something. In a coherent discourse some entities are salient, and the discourse focuses on them and doesn’t go back and forth between multiple entities. This is called entity-based coherence. Consider the following incoherent passage, in which the salient entity seems to wildly swing from John to Jenny to the piano store to the living room, back to Jenny, then the piano again: (24.3) John wanted to buy a piano for his living room. Jenny also wanted to buy a piano. He went to the piano store. It was nearby. The living room was on the second ﬂoor. She didn’t ﬁnd anything she liked. The piano he bought was hard to get up to that ﬂoor. Entity-based coherence models measure this kind of coherence by tracking salient entities across a discourse. For example Centering Theory (Grosz et al., 1995), theCentering Theory most inﬂuential theory of entity-based coherence, keeps track of which entities in the discourse model are salient at any point (salient entities are more likely to be pronominalized or to appear in prominent syntactic positions like subject or object). In Centering Theory, transitions between sentences that maintain the same salient entity are considered more coherent than ones that repeatedly shift between entities. The entity grid model of coherence (Barzilay and Lapata, 2008) is a commonlyentity grid used model that realizes some of the intuitions of the Centering Theory framework. Entity-based coherence is introduced in Section 24.3. Finally, discourses can be locally coherent by being topically coherent: nearbytopically coherent sentences are generally about the same topic and use the same or similar vocabulary to discuss these topics. Because topically coherent discourses draw from a single semantic ﬁeld or topic, they tend to exhibit the surface property known as lexical cohesion (Halliday and Hasan, 1976): the sharing of identical or semanti-lexical cohesion cally related words in nearby sentences. For example, the fact that the words house, chimney, garret, closet, and window— all of which belong to the same semantic ﬁeld— appear in the two sentences in (24.4), or that they share the identical word shingled, is a cue that the two are tied together as a discourse: (24.4) Before winter I built a chimney, and shingled the sides of my house... I have thus a tight shingled and plastered house... with a garret and a closet, a large window on each side.... In addition to the local coherence between adjacent or nearby sentences, discourses also exhibit global coherence. Many genres of text are associated with particular conventional discourse structures. Academic articles might have sections describing the Methodology or Results. Stories might follow conventional plotlines or motifs. Persuasive essays have a particular claim they are trying to argue for, and an essay might express this claim together with a structured set of premises that support the argument and demolish potential counterarguments. We’ll introduce versions of each of these kinds of global coherence. Why do we care about the local or global coherence of a discourse? Since coherence is a property of a well-written text, coherence detection plays a part in any 24.1 • C OHERENCE RELATIONS 3 task that requires measuring the quality of a text. For example coherence can help in pedagogical tasks like essay grading or essay quality measurement that are trying to grade how well-written a human essay is (Somasundaran et al. 2014, Feng et al. 2014, Lai and Tetreault 2018). Coherence can also help for summarization; knowing the coherence relationship between sentences can help know how to select information from them. Finally, detecting incoherent text may even play a role in mental health tasks like measuring symptoms of schizophrenia or other kinds of disordered language (Ditman and Kuperberg 2010, Elvev ˚ag et al. 2007, Bedi et al. 2015, Iter et al. 2018). 24.1 Coherence Relations Recall from the introduction the difference between passages (24.5) and (24.6). (24.5) Jane took a train from Paris to Istanbul. She likes spinach. (24.6) Jane took a train from Paris to Istanbul. She had to attend a conference. The reason (24.6) is more coherent is that the reader can form a connection between the two sentences, in which the second sentence provides a potentialREASON for the ﬁrst sentences. This link is harder to form for (24.5). These connections between text spans in a discourse can be speciﬁed as a set of coherence relations.coherence relation The next two sections describe two commonly used models of coherence relations and associated corpora: Rhetorical Structure Theory (RST), and the Penn Discourse TreeBank (PDTB). 24.1.1 Rhetorical Structure Theory The most commonly used model of discourse organization is Rhetorical Structure Theory (RST) (Mann and Thompson, 1987). In RST relations are deﬁned betweenRST two spans of text, generally a nucleus and a satellite. The nucleus is the unit thatnucleus satellite is more central to the writer’s purpose and that is interpretable independently; the satellite is less central and generally is only interpretable with respect to the nucleus. Some symmetric relations, however, hold between two nuclei. Below are a few examples of RST coherence relations, with deﬁnitions adapted from the RST Treebank Manual (Carlson and Marcu, 2001). Reason: The nucleus is an action carried out by an animate agent and the satellite is the reason for the nucleus. (24.7) [ NUC Jane took a train from Paris to Istanbul.] [SAT She had to attend a conference.] Elaboration: The satellite gives additional information or detail about the situation presented in the nucleus. (24.8) [ NUC Dorothy was from Kansas.] [SAT She lived in the midst of the great Kansas prairies.] Evidence: The satellite gives additional information or detail about the situation presented in the nucleus. The information is presented with the goal of convince the reader to accept the information presented in the nucleus. (24.9) [ NUC Kevin must be here.] [SAT His car is parked outside.] Attribution: The satellite gives the source of attribution for an instance of reported speech in the nucleus. (24.10) [ SAT Analysts estimated] [NUC that sales at U.S. stores declined in the quarter, too] List: In this multinuclear relation, a series of nuclei is given, without contrast or explicit comparison: (24.11) [ NUC Billy Bones was the mate; ] [NUC Long John, he was quartermaster] RST relations are traditionally represented graphically; the asymmetric NucleusSatellite relation is represented with an arrow from the satellite to the nucleus: Kevin must be here. His car is parked outside evidence We can also talk about the coherence of a larger text by considering the hierarchical structure between coherence relations. Figure 24.1 shows the rhetorical structure of a paragraph from Marcu (2000a) for the text in (24.12) from the Scientiﬁc American magazine. (24.12) With its distant orbit–50 percent farther from the sun than Earth–and slim atmospheric blanket, Mars experiences frigid weather conditions. Surface temperatures typically average about -60 degrees Celsius (-76 degrees Fahrenheit) at the equator and can dip to -123 degrees C near the poles. Only the midday sun at tropical latitudes is warm enough to thaw ice on occasion, but any liquid water formed in this way would evaporate almost instantly because of the low atmospheric pressure. Title (1) Mars 2-9 evidence 2-3 background (2) WIth its distant orbit <p> -50 percent farther from the sun than Earth -</p> and slim atmospheric blanket, (3) Mars experiences frigid weather conditions. 4-9 elaboration-additional (4) Surface temperatures typically average about -60 degrees Celsius <p> (-76 degrees Fahrenheit)</p> at the equator 4-5 List (5) and can dip to -123 degrees C near the poles. 6-9 Contrast 6-7 (6) Only the midday sun at tropical latitudes is warm enough (7) to thaw ice on occasion, purpose 8-9 explanation-argumentative (8) but any liquid water formed in this way would evaporate almost instantly (9) because of the low atmospheric pressure. Figure 24.1 A discourse tree for the Scientiﬁc American text in (24.12), from Marcu (2000a). Note that asymmetric relations are represented with a curved arrow from the satellite to the nucleus. The leaves in the Fig. 24.1 tree correspond to text spans of a sentence, clause or phrase that are called elementary discourse units or EDUs in RST; these units canEDU also be referred to as discourse segments. Because these units may correspond to arbitrary spans of text, determining the boundaries of an EDU is an important task for extracting coherence relations. Roughly speaking, one can think of discourse 24.1 • C OHERENCE RELATIONS 5 segments as being analogous to constituents in sentence syntax, and indeed as we’ll see in Section 24.2 we generally draw on parsing algorithms to infer discourse structure. There are corpora for many discourse coherence models; the RST Discourse TreeBank (Carlson et al., 2001) is the largest available discourse corpus. It consists of 385 English language documents selected from the Penn Treebank, with full RST parses for each one, using a large set of 78 distinct relations, grouped into 16 classes. RST treebanks exist also for Spanish, German, Basque, Dutch and Brazilian Portuguese (Braud et al., 2017). Now that we’ve seen examples of coherence, we can see more clearly how a coherence relation can play a role in summarization or information extraction. For example, the nuclei of a text presumably express more important information than the satellites, which might be dropped in a summary. 24.1.2 Penn Discourse TreeBank (PDTB) The Penn Discourse TreeBank (PDTB) is a second commonly used dataset thatPDTB embodies another model of coherence relations (Miltsakaki et al. 2004, Prasad et al. 2008, Prasad et al. 2014). PDTB labeling is lexically grounded. Instead of asking annotators to directly tag the coherence relation between text spans, they were given a list of discourse connectives, words that signal discourse relations, like because,discourse connectives although, when, since, or as a result. In a part of a text where these words marked a coherence relation between two text spans, the connective and the spans were then annotated, as in Fig. 24.13, where the phrase as a result signals a causal relationship between what PDTB calls Arg1 (the ﬁrst two sentences, here in italics) and Arg2 (the third sentence, here in bold). (24.13) Jewelry displays in department stores were often cluttered and uninspired. And the merchandise was, well, fake. As a result, marketers of faux gems steadily lost space in department stores to more fashionable rivals—cosmetics makers. (24.14) In July, the Environmental Protection Agency imposed a gradual ban on virtually all uses of asbestos. (implicit=as a result) By 1997, almost all remaining uses of cancer-causing asbestos will be outlawed. Not all coherence relations are marked by an explicit discourse connective, and so the PDTB also annotates pairs of neighboring sentences with no explicit signal, like (24.14). The annotator ﬁrst chooses the word or phrase that could have been its signal (in this case as a result), and then labels its sense. For example for the ambiguous discourse connectivesince annotators marked whether it is using a CAUSAL or a TEMPORAL sense. The ﬁnal dataset contains roughly 18,000 explicit relations and 16,000 implicit relations. Fig. 24.2 shows examples from each of the 4 major semantic classes, while Fig. 24.3 shows the full tagset. Unlike the RST Discourse Treebank, which integrates these pairwise coherence relations into a global tree structure spanning an entire discourse, the PDTB does not annotate anything above the span-pair level, making no commitment with respect to higher-level discourse structure. There are also treebanks using similar methods for other languages; (24.15) shows an example from the Chinese Discourse TreeBank (Zhou and Xue, 2015). Because Chinese has a smaller percentage of explicit discourse connectives than English (only 22% of all discourse relations are marked with explicit connectives, Class Type Example TEMPORAL SYNCHRONOUS The parishioners of St. Michael and All Angels stop to chat at the church door, as members here always have. (Implicit while) In the tower, ﬁve men and women pull rhythmically on ropes attached to the same ﬁve bells that ﬁrst sounded here in 1614. CONTINGENCY REASON Also unlike Mr. Ruder, Mr. Breeden appears to be in a position to get somewhere with his agenda. (implicit=because) As a former White House aide who worked closely with Congress, he is savvy in the ways of Washington. COMPARISON CONTRAST The U.S. wants the removal of what it perceives as barriers to investment; Japan denies there are real barriers. EXPANSION CONJUNCTION Not only do the actors stand outside their characters and make it clear they are at odds with them, but they often literally stand on their heads. Figure 24.2 The four high-level semantic distinctions in the PDTB sense hierarchy Temporal Comparison • Asynchronous • Contrast (Juxtaposition, Opposition) • Synchronous (Precedence, Succession) •Pragmatic Contrast (Juxtaposition, Opposition) • Concession (Expectation, Contra-expectation) • Pragmatic Concession Contingency Expansion • Cause (Reason, Result) • Exception • Pragmatic Cause (Justiﬁcation) • Instantiation • Condition (Hypothetical, General, Unreal Present/Past, Factual Present/Past) • Restatement (Speciﬁcation, Equivalence, Generalization) • Pragmatic Condition (Relevance, Implicit Assertion) • Alternative (Conjunction, Disjunction, Chosen Alternative) • List Figure 24.3 The PDTB sense hierarchy. There are four top-level c¯lasses, 16 types, and 23 subtypes (not all types have subtypes). 11 of the 16 types are commonly used for implicit argument classiﬁcation; the 5 types in italics are too rare in implicit labeling to be used. compared to 47% in English), annotators labeled this corpus by directly mapping pairs of sentences to 11 sense tags, without starting with a lexical discourse connector. (24.15) [ Conn 为] [Arg2 推动图们江地区开发] ，[Arg1 韩国捐款一百万美元 设立了图们江发展基金] “[In order to] [Arg2 promote the development of the Tumen River region], [Arg1 South Korea donated one million dollars to establish the Tumen River Development Fund].” These discourse treebanks have been used for shared tasks on multilingual discourse parsing (Xue et al., 2016). 24.2 Discourse Structure Parsing Given a sequence of sentences, how can we automatically determine the coherence relations between them? This task is often called discourse parsing (even thoughdiscourse parsing for PDTB we are only assigning labels to leaf spans and not building a full parse 24.2 • D ISCOURSE STRUCTURE PARSING 7 tree as we do for RST). 24.2.1 EDU segmentation for RST parsing RST parsing is generally done in two stages. The ﬁrst stage, EDU segmentation, extracts the start and end of each EDU. The output of this stage would be a labeling like the following: (24.16) [Mr. Rambo says] e1 [that a 3.2-acre property]e2 [overlooking the San Fernando Valley]e3 [is priced at $4 million]e4 [because the late actor Erroll Flynn once lived there.]e5 Since EDUs roughly correspond to clauses, early models of EDU segmentation ﬁrst ran a syntactic parser, and then post-processed the output. Modern systems generally use neural sequence models supervised by the gold EDU segmentation in datasets like the RST Discourse Treebank. Fig. 24.4 shows an example architecture simpliﬁed from the algorithm of Lukasik et al. (2020) that predicts for each token whether or not it is a break. Here the input sentence is passed through an encoder and then passed through a linear layer and a softmax to produce a sequence of 0s and 1, where 1 indicates the start of an EDU. Mr. Rambo says that ENCODER … 0 0 0 1 linear layer softmax EDU break Figure 24.4 Predicting EDU segment beginnings from encoded text. 24.2.2 RST parsing Tools for building RST coherence structure for a discourse have long been based on syntactic parsing algorithms like shift-reduce parsing (Marcu, 1999). Many modern RST parsers since Ji and Eisenstein (2014) draw on the neural syntactic parsers we saw in Chapter 19, using representation learning to build representations for each span, and training a parser to choose the correct shift and reduce actions based on the gold parses in the training set. We’ll describe the shift-reduce parser of Yu et al. (2018). The parser state consists of a stack and a queue, and produces this structure by taking a series of actions on the states. Actions include: • shift: pushes the ﬁrst EDU in the queue onto the stack creating a single-node subtree. • reduce(l,d): merges the top two subtrees on the stack, wherel is the coherence relation label, and d is the nuclearity direction, d∈{ NN ,NS,SN}. As well as the pop root operation, to remove the ﬁnal tree from the stack. Fig. 24.6 shows the actions the parser takes to build the structure in Fig. 24.5. e1 e2 e3 e4 attr elab elab e1: American Telephone & Telegraph Co. said it e2: will lay off 75 to 85 technicians here , effective Nov. 1. e3: The workers install , maintain and repair its private branch exchanges, e4: which are large intracompany telephone networks. Figure 1: An example of RST discourse tree, where {e1,e 2,e 3,e 4} are EDUs, attr and elab are discourse relation labels, and arrows indicate the nuclearities of discourse relations. RST discourse parsing. Other studies still adopt discrete syntax features proposed by statistical models, feeding them into neural network models (Braud et al., 2016; Braud et al., 2017). The above approaches model syntax trees in an explicit way, requiring discrete syntax parsing outputs as inputs for RST parsing. These approaches may suffer from the error propagation problem. Syntax trees produced by a supervised syntax parsing model could have errors, which may propagate into discourse parsing models. The problem could be extremely serious when inputs of discourse parsing have different distributions with the training data of the supervised syntax parser. Recently, Zhang et al. (2017) suggest an alternative method, which extracts syntax features from a Bi-Afﬁne dependency parser (Dozat and Manning, 2016), and the method gives competitive performances on relation extraction. It actually represents syntax trees implicitly, thus it can reduce the error propagation problem. In this work, we investigate the implicit syntax feature extraction approach for RST parsing. In addition, we propose a transition-based neural model for this task, which is able to incorporate various features ﬂexibly. We exploit hierarchical bi-directional LSTMs (Bi-LSTMs) to encode texts, and further enhance the transition-based model with dynamic oracle. Based on the proposed model, we study the effectiveness of our proposed implicit syntax features. We conduct experiments on a standard RST discourse TreeBank (Carlson et al., 2003). First, we evaluate the performance of our proposed transitionbased baseline, ﬁnding that the model is able to achieve strong performances after applying dynamic oracle. Then we evaluate the effectiveness of implicit syntax features extracted from a Bi-Afﬁne dependency parser. Results show that the implicit syntax features are effective, giving better performances than explicit Tree-LSTM (Li et al., 2015b). Our codes will be released for public under the Apache License 2.0 at https://github.com/yunan4nlp/NNDisParser. In summary, we mainly make the following two contributions in this work: (1) we propose a transitionbased neural RST discourse parsing model with dynamic oracle, (2) we compare three different syntactic integration approaches proposed by us. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our proposed models including the transition-based neural model, the dynamic oracle strategy and the implicit syntax feature extraction approach. Section 3 presents the experiments to evaluate our models. Section 4 shows the related work. Finally, section 5 draws conclusions. 2 Transition-based Discourse Parsing We follow Ji and Eisenstein (2014), exploiting a transition-based framework for RST discourse parsing. The framework is conceptually simple and ﬂexible to support arbitrary features, which has been widely used in a number of NLP tasks (Zhu et al., 2013; Dyer et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2016). In addition, a transition-based model formalizes a certain task into predicting a sequence of actions, which is essential similar to sequence-to-sequence models proposed recently (Bahdanau et al., 2014). In the following, we ﬁrst describe the transition system for RST discourse parsing, and then introduce our neural network model by its encoder and decoder parts, respectively. Thirdly, we present our proposed dynamic oracle strategy aiming to enhance the transition-based model. Then we introduce the integration method of implicit syntax features. Finally we describe the training method of our neural network models. 2.1 The Transition-based System The transition-based framework converts a structural learning problem into a sequence of action predictions, whose key point is a transition system. A transition system consists of two parts: states and actions. The states are used to store partially-parsed results and the actions are used to control state transitions. Figure 24.5 Example RST discourse tree, showing four EDUs. Figure from Yu et al. (2018). Step Stack Queue Action Relation 1 ? e1, e2, e3, e4 SH ? 2 e1 e2, e3, e4 SH ? 3 e1, e2 e3, e4 RD(attr,SN) ? 4 e1:2 e3, e4 SH de1e2 5 e1:2 , e3 e4 SH de1e2 6 e1:2 , e3, e4 ? RD(elab,NS) de1e2 7 e1:2 , e3:4 ? RD(elab,SN) de1e2, de3e4 8 e1:4 ? PR de1e2, de3e4, \e1:2e3:4 Table 1: An example of the transition-based system for RST discourse parsing. The initial state is an empty state, and the ﬁnal state represents a full result. There are three kinds of actions in our transition system: • Shift (SH), which removes the ﬁrst EDU in the queue onto the stack, forming a single-node subtree. • Reduce (RD) (l,d), which merges the top two subtrees on the stack, where l is a discourse relation label, and d 2{ NN, NS, SN} indicates the relation nuclearity (nuclear (N) or satellite (S)). • Pop Root (PR), which pops out the top tree on the stack, marking the decoding being completed, when the stack holds only one subtree and the queue is empty. Given the RST tree as shown in Figure 1, it can be generated by the following action sequence: {SH, SH, RD (attr,SN), SH, SH, RD (elab,NS), RD (elab,SN), PR }. Table 1 shows the decoding process in detail. By this way, we naturally convert RST discourse parsing into predicting a sequence of transition actions, where each line includes a state and next step action referring to the tree. 2.2 Encoder-Decoder Previous transition-based RST discourse parsing studies exploit statistical models, using manuallydesigned discrete features (Sagae, 2009; Heilman and Sagae, 2015; Wang et al., 2017). In this work, we propose a transition-based neural model for RST discourse parsing, which follows an encoder-decoder framework. Given an input sequence of EDUs {e1,e 2,. . . ,en}, the encoder computes the input representations {he 1, he 2,. . . ,he n}, and the decoder predicts next step actions conditioned on the encoder outputs. 2.2.1 Encoder We follow Li et al. (2016), using hierarchical Bi-LSTMs to encode the source EDU inputs, where the ﬁrst-layer is used to represent sequencial words inside of EDUs, and the second layer is used to represent sequencial EDUs. Given an input sentence {w1,w 2,. . . ,wm}, ﬁrst we represent each word by its form (e.g., wi) and POS tag (e.g. ti), concatenating their neural embeddings. By this way, the input vectors of the ﬁrst-layer Bi-LSTM are {xw 1 , xw 2 ,. . . ,xw m}, where xw i = emb(wi)   emb(ti), and then we apply Bi-LSTM directly, obtaining: {hw 1 , hw 2 ,. . . ,hw m} = Bi-LSTM({xw 1 , xw 2 ,. . . ,xw m}) (1) The second-layer Bi-LSTM is built over sequential EDUs. We should ﬁrst obtain a suitable representation for each EDU, which is composed by a span of words inside a certain sentence. Assuming an EDU with its words by {ws,w s+1,. . . ,wt}, after applying the ﬁrst-layer Bi-LSTM, we obtain their representations by {hw s , hw s+1..., hw t }, then we calculate the EDU representation by average pooling: xe = 1 t   s +1 tX s hw k (2) When the EDU representations are ready, we apply the second-layer Bi-LSTM directly, resulting: {he 1, he 2,. . . ,he n} = Bi-LSTM({xe 1, xe 2,. . . ,xe n}) (3) Figure 24.6 Parsing the example of Fig. 24.5 using a shift-reduce parser. Figure from Yu et al. (2018). The Yu et al. (2018) uses an encoder-decoder architecture, where the encoder represents the input span of words and EDUs using a hierarchical biLSTM. The ﬁrst biLSTM layer represents the words inside an EDU, and the second represents the EDU sequence. Given an input sentence w1,w2, ...,wm, the words can be represented as usual (by static embeddings, combinations with character embeddings or tags, or contextual embeddings) resulting in an input word representation sequence xw 1 ,xw 2 , ...,xw m. The result of the word-level biLSTM is then a sequence of hw values: hw 1 ,hw 2 , ...,hw m = biLSTM(xw 1 ,xw 2 , ...,xw m) (24.17) An EDU of spanws,ws+1, ...,wt then has biLSTM output representationhw s ,hw s+1, ...,hw t , and is represented by average pooling: xe = 1 t− s + 1 t∑ k=s hw k (24.18) The second layer uses this input to compute a ﬁnal representation of the sequence of EDU representations he: he 1,he 2, ...,he n = biLSTM(xe 1,xe 2, ...,xe n) (24.19) The decoder is then a feedforward network W that outputs an action o based on a concatenation of the top three subtrees on the stack ( so,s1,s2) plus the ﬁrst EDU in the queue (q0): o = W(ht s0,ht s1,ht s2,he q0) (24.20) where the representation of the EDU on the queue he q0 comes directly from the encoder, and the three hidden vectors representing partial trees are computed by average pooling over the encoder output for the EDUs in those trees: hts = 1 j− i + 1 j∑ k=i he k (24.21) 24.2 • D ISCOURSE STRUCTURE PARSING 9 Training ﬁrst maps each RST gold parse tree into a sequence of oracle actions, and then uses the standard cross-entropy loss (with l2 regularization) to train the system to take such actions. Give a state S and oracle action a, we ﬁrst compute the decoder output using Eq. 24.20, apply a softmax to get probabilities: pa = exp(oa)∑ a′∈A exp(oa′) (24.22) and then computing the cross-entropy loss: LCE () = −log(pa) + λ 2||Θ||2 (24.23) RST discourse parsers are evaluated on the test section of the RST Discourse Treebank, either with gold EDUs or end-to-end, using the RST-Pareval metrics (Marcu, 2000b). It is standard to ﬁrst transform the gold RST trees into right-branching binary trees, and to report four metrics: trees with no labels (S for Span), labeled with nuclei (N), with relations (R), or both (F for Full), for each metric computing micro-averaged F1 over all spans from all documents (Marcu 2000b, Morey et al. 2017). 24.2.3 PDTB discourse parsing PDTB discourse parsing, the task of detecting PDTB coherence relations between spans, is sometimes called shallow discourse parsing because the task just involves shallow discourse parsing ﬂat relationships between text spans, rather than the full trees of RST parsing. The set of four subtasks for PDTB discourse parsing was laid out by Lin et al. (2014) in the ﬁrst complete system, with separate tasks for explicit (tasks 1-3) and implicit (task 4) connectives: 1. Find the discourse connectives (disambiguating them from non-discourse uses) 2. Find the two spans for each connective 3. Label the relationship between these spans 4. Assign a relation between every adjacent pair of sentences Many systems have been proposed for Task 4: taking a pair of adjacent sentences as input and assign a coherence relation sense label as output. The setup often follows Lin et al. (2009) in assuming gold sentence span boundaries and assigning each adjacent span one of the 11 second-level PDTB tags or none (removing the 5 very rare tags of the 16 shown in italics in Fig. 24.3). A simple but very strong algorithm for Task 4 is to represent each of the two spans by BERT embeddings and take the last layer hidden state corresponding to the position of the [CLS] token, pass this through a single layer tanh feedforward network and then a softmax for sense classiﬁcation (Nie et al., 2019). Each of the other tasks also have been addressed. Task 1 is to disambiguating discourse connectives from their non-discourse use. For example as Pitler and Nenkova (2009) point out, the word and is a discourse connective linking the two clauses by an elaboration/expansion relation in (24.24) while it’s a non-discourse NP conjunction in (24.25): (24.24) Selling picked up as previous buyers bailed out of their positions and aggressive short sellers—anticipating further declines—moved in. (24.25) My favorite colors are blue and green. Similarly, once is a discourse connective indicating a temporal relation in (24.26), but simply a non-discourse adverb meaning ‘formerly’ and modifyingused in (24.27): (24.26) The asbestos ﬁber, crocidolite, is unusually resilient once it enters the lungs, with even brief exposures to it causing symptoms that show up decades later, researchers said. (24.27) A form of asbestos once used to make Kent cigarette ﬁlters has caused a high percentage of cancer deaths among a group of workers exposed to it more than 30 years ago, researchers reported. Determining whether a word is a discourse connective is thus a special case of word sense disambiguation. Early work on disambiguation showed that the 4 PDTB high-level sense classes could be disambiguated with high (94%) accuracy used syntactic features from gold parse trees (Pitler and Nenkova, 2009). Recent work performs the task end-to-end from word inputs using a biLSTM-CRF with BIO outputs (B-CONN , I-CONN , O) (Yu et al., 2019). For task 2, PDTB spans can be identiﬁed with the same sequence models used to ﬁnd RST EDUs: a biLSTM sequence model with pretrained contextual embedding (BERT) inputs (Muller et al., 2019). Simple heuristics also do pretty well as a baseline at ﬁnding spans, since 93% of relations are either completely within a single sentence or span two adjacent sentences, with one argument in each sentence (Biran and McKeown, 2015). 24.3 Centering and Entity-Based Coherence A second way a discourse can be coherent is by virtue of being “about” some entity. This idea that at each point in the discourse some entity is salient, and a discourse is coherent by continuing to discuss the same entity, appears early in functional linguistics and the psychology of discourse (Chafe 1976, Kintsch and Van Dijk 1978), and soon made its way to computational models. In this section we introduce two models of this kind of entity-based coherence: Centering Theory (Grosz et al.,entity-based 1995), and the entity grid model of Barzilay and Lapata (2008). 24.3.1 Centering Centering Theory (Grosz et al., 1995) is a theory of both discourse salience andCentering Theory discourse coherence. As a model of discourse salience, Centering proposes that at any given point in the discourse one of the entities in the discourse model is salient: it is being “centered” on. As a model of discourse coherence, Centering proposes that discourses in which adjacent sentences CONTINUE to maintain the same salient entity are more coherent than those which SHIFT back and forth between multiple entities (we will see that CONTINUE and SHIFT are technical terms in the theory). The following two texts from Grosz et al. (1995) which have exactly the same propositional content but different saliences, can help in understanding the main Centering intuition. (24.28) a. John went to his favorite music store to buy a piano. b. He had frequented the store for many years. c. He was excited that he could ﬁnally buy a piano. d. He arrived just as the store was closing for the day. 24.3 • C ENTERING AND ENTITY -BASED COHERENCE 11 (24.29) a. John went to his favorite music store to buy a piano. b. It was a store John had frequented for many years. c. He was excited that he could ﬁnally buy a piano. d. It was closing just as John arrived. While these two texts differ only in how the two entities (John and the store) are realized in the sentences, the discourse in (24.28) is intuitively more coherent than the one in (24.29). As Grosz et al. (1995) point out, this is because the discourse in (24.28) is clearly about one individual, John, describing his actions and feelings. The discourse in (24.29), by contrast, focuses ﬁrst on John, then the store, then back to John, then to the store again. It lacks the “aboutness” of the ﬁrst discourse. Centering Theory realizes this intuition by maintaining two representations for each utterance Un. The backward-looking center of Un, denoted as Cb(Un), repbackwardlooking center resents the current salient entity, the one being focused on in the discourse after Un is interpreted. The forward-looking centers of Un, denoted as Cf (Un), are a setforward-looking center of potential future salient entities, the discourse entities evoked by Un any of which could serve as Cb (the salient entity) of the following utterance, i.e. Cb(Un+1). The set of forward-looking centers Cf (Un) are ranked according to factors like discourse salience and grammatical role (for example subjects are higher ranked than objects, which are higher ranked than all other grammatical roles). We call the highest-ranked forward-looking center Cp (for “preferred center”). Cp is a kind of prediction about what entity will be talked about next. Sometimes the next utterance indeed talks about this entity, but sometimes another entity becomes salient instead. We’ll use here the algorithm for centering presented in Brennan et al. (1987), which deﬁnes four intersentential relationships between a pair of utterances Un and Un+1 that depend on the relationship between Cb(Un+1), Cb(Un), and Cp(Un+1); these are shown in Fig. 24.7. Cb(Un+1) = Cb(Un) Cb(Un+1)̸= Cb(Un) or undeﬁned Cb(Un) Cb(Un+1) = Cp(Un+1) Continue Smooth-Shift Cb(Un+1)̸= Cp(Un+1) Retain Rough-Shift Figure 24.7 Centering Transitions for Rule 2 from Brennan et al. (1987). The following rules are used by the algorithm: Rule 1: If any element of Cf (Un) is realized by a pronoun in utterance Un+1, then Cb(Un+1) must be realized as a pronoun also. Rule 2: Transition states are ordered. Continue is preferred to Retain is preferred to Smooth-Shift is preferred to Rough-Shift. Rule 1 captures the intuition that pronominalization (including zero-anaphora) is a common way to mark discourse salience. If there are multiple pronouns in an utterance realizing entities from the previous utterance, one of these pronouns must realize the backward center Cb; if there is only one pronoun, it must be Cb. Rule 2 captures the intuition that discourses that continue to center the same entity are more coherent than ones that repeatedly shift to other centers. The transition table is based on two factors: whether the backward-looking center Cb is the same from Un to Un+1 and whether this discourse entity is the one that is preferred ( Cp) in the new utterance Un+1. If both of these hold, a CONTINUE relation, the speaker has been talking about the same entity and is going to continue talking about that entity. In a RETAIN relation, the speaker intends to SHIFT to a new entity in a future utterance and meanwhile places the current entity in a lower rank Cf . In a SHIFT relation, the speaker is shifting to a new salient entity. Let’s walk though the start of (24.28) again, repeated as (24.30), showing the representations after each utterance is processed. (24.30) John went to his favorite music store to buy a piano. ( U1) He was excited that he could ﬁnally buy a piano. (U2) He arrived just as the store was closing for the day. (U3) It was closing just as John arrived (U4) Using the grammatical role hierarchy to order the C f , for sentence U1 we get: Cf (U1):{John, music store, piano} Cp(U1): John Cb(U1): undeﬁned and then for sentence U2: Cf (U2):{John, piano} Cp(U2): John Cb(U2): John Result: Continue ( Cp(U2)=Cb(U2); Cb(U1) undeﬁned) The transition from U1 to U2 is thus a CONTINUE . Completing this example is left as exercise (1) for the reader 24.3.2 Entity Grid model Centering embodies a particular theory of how entity mentioning leads to coherence: that salient entities appear in subject position or are pronominalized, and that discourses are salient by means of continuing to mention the same entity in such ways. The entity grid model of Barzilay and Lapata (2008) is an alternative way toentity grid capture entity-based coherence: instead of having a top-down theory, the entity-grid model using machine learning to induce the patterns of entity mentioning that make a discourse more coherent. The model is based around an entity grid, a two-dimensional array that represents the distribution of entity mentions across sentences. The rows represent sentences, and the columns represent discourse entities (most versions of the entity grid model focus just on nominal mentions). Each cell represents the possible appearance of an entity in a sentence, and the values represent whether the entity appears and its grammatical role. Grammatical roles are subject ( S), object ( O), neither ( X), or absent (–); in the implementation of Barzilay and Lapata (2008), subjects of passives are represented with O, leading to a representation with some of the characteristics of thematic roles. Fig. 24.8 from Barzilay and Lapata (2008) shows a grid for the text shown in Fig. 24.9. There is one row for each of the six sentences. The second column, for the entity ‘trial’, isO – – – X, showing that the trial appears in the ﬁrst sentence as direct object, in the last sentence as an oblique, and does not appear in the middle sentences. The third column, for the entity Microsoft, shows that it appears as subject in sentence 1 (it also appears as the object of the prepositionagainst, but entities that appear multiple times are recorded with their highest-ranked grammatical function). Computing the entity grids requires extracting entities and doing coreference 24.3 • C ENTERING AND ENTITY -BASED COHERENCE 13 Computational Linguistics V olume 34, Number 1 these patterns can be encoded as feature vectors appropriate for performing coherencerelated ranking and classiﬁcation tasks. 3.1 The Entity-Grid Discourse Representation Each text is represented by an entity grid ,at w o d i m e n s i o n a la r r a yt h a tc a p t u r e s the distribution of discourse entities across text sentences. We follow Miltsakaki and Kukich (2000) in assuming that our unit of analysis is the traditional sentence (i.e., a main clause with accompanying subordinate and adjunct clauses). The rows of the grid correspond to sentences, and the columns correspond to discourse entities. By discourse entity we mean a class of coreferent noun phrases (we explain in Section 3.3 how coreferent entities are identiﬁed). For each occurrence of a discourse entity in the text, the corresponding grid cell contains information about its presence or absence in a sequence of sentences. In addition, for entities present in a given sentence, grid cells contain information about their syntactic role. Such information can be expressed in many ways (e.g., using constituent labels or thematic role information). Because grammatical relations ﬁgure prominently in entity-based theories of local coherence (see Section 2), they serve as a logical point of departure. Each grid cell thus corresponds to a string from a set of categories reﬂecting whether the entity in question is a subject ( S), object ( O), or neither ( X). Entities absent from a sentence are signaled by gaps ( –). Grammatical role information can be extracted from the output of a broad-coverage dependency parser (Lin 2001; Briscoe and Carroll 2002) or any state-of-the art statistical parser (Collins 1997; Charniak 2000). We discuss how this information was computed for our experiments in Section 3.3. Table 1 illustrates a fragment of an entity grid constructed for the text in Table 2. Because the text contains six sentences, the grid columns are of length six. Consider for instance the grid column for the entity trial, [O –––– X].I tr e c o r d st h a ttrial is present in sentences 1 and 6 (as O and X,r e s p e c t i v e l y )b u ti sa b s e n tf r o mt h er e s to ft h e sentences. Also note that the grid in Table 1 takes coreference resolution into account. Even though the same entity appears in different linguistic forms, for example, Microsoft Corp., Microsoft,a n d the company , it is mapped to a single entry in the grid (see the column introduced by Microsoft in Table 1). Ta b l e 1 A fragment of the entity grid. Noun phrases are represented by their head nouns. Grid cells correspond to grammatical roles: subjects ( S), objects ( O), or neither ( X). Department Trial Microsoft Evidence Competitors Markets Products Brands Case Netscape Software Tactics Government Suit Earnings 1 SO SXO –––– – –––– – 1 2 –– O –– XSO ––– – – –– 2 3 –– SO –– – – SO O ––– – 3 4 –– S ––– – – ––– S –– – 4 5 –– – ––– – – ––– – SO – 5 6 – XS ––– – – ––– – – – O 6 Figure 24.8 Part of the entity grid for the text in Fig. 24.9. Entities are listed by their head noun; each cell represents whether an entity appears as subject (S), object (O), neither (X), or is absent (–). Figure from Barzilay and Lapata (2008). Barzilay and Lapata Modeling Local Coherence Ta b l e 2 Summary augmented with syntactic annotations for grid computation. 1 [The Justice Department] S is conducting an [anti-trust trial] O against [Microsoft Corp.]X with [evidence]X that [the company]S is increasingly attempting to crush [competitors]O . 2[ M i c r o s o f t ]O is accused of trying to forcefully buy into [markets] X where [its own products]S are not competitive enough to unseat [established brands] O . 3[ T h e c a s e ]S revolves around [evidence]O of [Microsoft]S aggressively pressuring [Netscape]O into merging [browser software] O . 4[ M i c r o s o f t ]S claims [its tactics] S are commonplace and good economically . 5 [The government] S may ﬁle [a civil suit] O ruling that [conspiracy] S to curb [competition] O through [collusion]X is [a violation of the Sherman Act] O . 6[ M i c r o s o f t ]S continues to show [increased earnings] O despite [the trial] X . When a noun is attested more than once with a different grammatical role in the same sentence, we default to the role with the highest grammatical ranking: subjects are ranked higher than objects, which in turn are ranked higher than the rest. For example, the entity Microsoft is mentioned twice in Sentence 1 with the grammatical roles x (for Microsoft Corp. )a n d s (for the company ), but is represented only by s in the grid (see Tables 1 and 2). 3.2 Entity Grids as Feature V ectors Af u n d a m e n t a la s s u m p t i o nu n d e r l y i n go u ra p p r o a c hi st h a tt h ed i s t r i b u t i o no fe n t i t i e s in coherent texts exhibits certain regularities reﬂected in grid topology . Some of these regularities are formalized in Centering Theory as constraints on transitions of the local focus in adjacent sentences. Grids of coherent texts are likely to have some dense columns (i.e., columns with just a few gaps, such as Microsoft in Table 1) and many sparse columns which will consist mostly of gaps (see markets and earnings in Table 1). One would further expect that entities corresponding to dense columns are more often subjects or objects. These characteristics will be less pronounced in low-coherence texts. Inspired by Centering Theory , our analysis revolves around patterns of local entity transitions. A local entity transition is a sequence {S, O, X, –}n that represents entity occurrences and their syntactic roles in n adjacent sentences. Local transitions can be easily obtained from a grid as continuous subsequences of each column. Each transition will have a certain probability in a given grid. For instance, the probability of the transition [S –] in the grid from Table 1 is 0 .08 (computed as a ratio of its frequency [i.e., six] divided by the total number of transitions of length two [i.e., 75]). Each text can thus be viewed as a distribution deﬁned over transition types. We can now go one step further and represent each text by a ﬁxed set of transition sequences using a standard feature vector notation. Each grid rendering j of a document di corresponds to a feature vector Φ(x ij ) = (p1 (x ij ), p2 (x ij ), ... , pm (x ij )), where m is the number of all predeﬁned entity transitions, and pt (x ij )t h ep r o b a b i l i t yo ft r a n s i t i o nt in grid x ij.T h i sf e a t u r ev e c t o rr e p r e s e n t a t i o ni su s e f u l l ya m e n a b l et om a c h i n el e a r n i n g algorithms (see our experiments in Sections 4–6). Furthermore, it allows the consideration of large numbers of transitions which could potentially uncover novel entity distribution patterns relevant for coherence assessment or other coherence-related tasks. Note that considerable latitude is available when specifying the transition types to be included in a feature vector. These can be all transitions of a given length (e.g., two or three) or the most frequent transitions within a document collection. An example of Figure 24.9 A discourse with the entities marked and annotated with grammatical functions. Figure from Barzilay and Lapata (2008). resolution to cluster them into discourse entities (Chapter 23) as well as parsing the sentences to get grammatical roles. In the resulting grid, columns that are dense (like the column for Microsoft) indicate entities that are mentioned often in the texts; sparse columns (like the column for earnings) indicate entities that are mentioned rarely. In the entity grid model, coherence is measured by patterns oflocal entity transition. For example, Department is a subject in sentence 1, and then not mentioned in sentence 2; this is the transition [ S –]. The transitions are thus sequences {S,O X , –}n which can be extracted as continuous cells from each column. Each transition has a probability; the probability of [S –] in the grid from Fig. 24.8 is 0.08 (it occurs 6 times out of the 75 total transitions of length two). Fig. 24.10 shows the distribution over transitions of length 2 for the text of Fig. 24.9 (shown as the ﬁrst row d1), and 2 other documents. Computational Linguistics V olume 34, Number 1 af e a t u r es p a c ew i t ht r a n s i t i o n so fl e n g t ht w oi si l l u s t r a t e di nT a b l e3 .T h es e c o n dr o w (introduced by d1)i st h ef e a t u r ev e c t o rr e p r e s e n t a t i o no ft h eg r i di nT a b l e1 . 3.3 Grid Construction: Linguistic Dimensions One of the central research issues in developing entity-based models of coherence is determining what sources of linguistic knowledge are essential for accurate prediction, and how to encode them succinctly in a discourse representation. Previous approaches tend to agree on the features of entity distribution related to local coherence—the disagreement lies in the way these features are modeled. Our study of alternative encodings is not a mere duplication of previous efforts (Poesio et al. 2004) that focus on linguistic aspects of parameterization. Because we are interested in an automatically constructed model, we have to take into account computational and learning issues when considering alternative representations. Therefore, our exploration of the parameter space is guided by three considerations: the linguistic importance of a parameter, the accuracy of its automatic computation, and the size of the resulting feature space. From the linguistic side, we focus on properties of entity distribution that are tightly linked to local coherence, and at the same time allow for multiple interpretations during the encoding process. Computational considerations prevent us from considering discourse representations that cannot be computed reliably by existing tools. For instance, we could not experiment with the granularity of an utterance— sentence versus clause—because available clause separators introduce substantial noise into a grid construction. Finally , we exclude representations that will explode the size of the feature space, thereby increasing the amount of data required for training the model. Entity Ex traction. The accurate computation of entity classes is key to computing meaningful entity grids. In previous implementations of entity-based models, classes of coreferent nouns have been extracted manually (Miltsakaki and Kukich 2000; Karamanis et al. 2004; Poesio et al. 2004), but this is not an option for our model. An obvious solution for identifying entity classes is to employ an automatic coreference resolution tool that determines which noun phrases refer to the same entity in a document. Current approaches recast coreference resolution as a classiﬁcation task. A pair of NPs is classiﬁed as coreferring or not based on constraints that are learned from an annotated corpus. A separate clustering mechanism then coordinates the possibly contradictory pairwise classiﬁcations and constructs a partition on the set of NPs. In our experiments, we employ Ng and Cardie’s (2002) coreference resolution system. The system decides whether two NPs are coreferent by exploiting a wealth of lexical, grammatical, semantic, and positional features. It is trained on the MUC (6–7) data sets and yields state-of-the-art performance (70.4 F-measure on MUC-6 and 63.4 on MUC-7). Ta b l e 3 Example of a feature-vector document representation using all transitions of length two given syntactic categories S, O, X,a n d –. SS SO SX S – OS OO OX O – XS XO XX X –– S – O – X –– d1 .01 .01 0 .08 .01 0 0 .09 0 0 0 .03 .05 .07 .03 .59 d2 .02 .01 .01 .02 0 .07 0 .02 .14 .14 .06 .04 .03 .07 0.1 .36 d3 .02 0 0 .03 .09 0 .09 .06 0 0 0 .05 .03 .07 .17 .39 Figure 24.10 A feature vector for representing documents using all transitions of length 2. Document d1 is the text in Fig. 24.9. Figure from Barzilay and Lapata (2008). The transitions and their probabilities can then be used as features for a machine learning model. This model can be a text classiﬁer trained to produce human-labeled coherence scores (for example from humans labeling each text as coherent or incoherent). But such data is expensive to gather. Barzilay and Lapata (2005) introduced a simplifying innovation: coherence models can be trained by self-supervision: trained to distinguish the natural original order of sentences in a discourse from a modiﬁed order (such as a randomized order). We turn to these evaluations in the next section. 24.3.3 Evaluating Neural and Entity-based coherence Entity-based coherence models, as well as the neural models we introduce in the next section, are generally evaluated in one of two ways. First, we can have humans rate the coherence of a document and train a classiﬁer to predict these human ratings, which can be categorial (high/low, or high/mid/low) or continuous. This is the best evaluation to use if we have some end task in mind, like essay grading, where human raters are the correct deﬁnition of the ﬁnal label. Alternatively, since it’s very expensive to get human labels, and we might not yet have an end-task in mind, we can use natural texts to do self-supervision. In self-supervision we pair up a natural discourse with a pseudo-document created by changing the ordering. Since naturally-ordered discourses are more coherent than random permutation (Lin et al., 2011), a successful coherence algorithm should prefer the original ordering. Self-supervision has been implemented in 3 ways. In the sentence order discrimination task (Barzilay and Lapata, 2005), we compare a document to a random permutation of its sentences. A model is considered correct for an (original, permuted) test pair if it ranks the original document higher. Givenk documents, we can compute n permutations, resulting in kn pairs each with one original document and one permutation, to use in training and testing. In the sentence insertion task (Chen et al., 2007) we take a document, remove one of the n sentences s, and create n−1 copies of the document withs inserted into each position. The task is to decide which of the n documents is the one with the original ordering, distinguishing the original position for s from all other positions. Insertion is harder than discrimination since we are comparing documents that differ by only one sentence. Finally, in the sentence order reconstruction task (Lapata, 2003), we take a document, randomize the sentences, and train the model to put them back in the correct order. Again given k documents, we can compute n permutations, resulting in kn pairs each with one original document and one permutation, to use in training and testing. Reordering is of course a much harder task than simple classiﬁcation. 24.4 Representation learning models for local coherence The third kind of local coherence is topical or semantic ﬁeld coherence. Discourses cohere by talking about the same topics and subtopics, and drawing on the same semantic ﬁelds in doing so. The ﬁeld was pioneered by a series of unsupervised models in the 1990s of this kind of coherence that made use of lexical cohesion (Halliday and Hasan, 1976):lexical cohesion the sharing of identical or semantically related words in nearby sentences. Morris and Hirst (1991) computed lexical chains of words (like pine, bush trees, trunk) that occurred through a discourse and that were related in Roget’s Thesaurus (by being in the same category, or linked categories). They showed that the number and density of chain correlated with the topic structure. The TextTiling algorithm of HearstTextTiling (1997) computed the cosine between neighboring text spans (the normalized dot product of vectors of raw word counts), again showing that sentences or paragraph in 24.4 • R EPRESENTATION LEARNING MODELS FOR LOCAL COHERENCE 15 a subtopic have high cosine with each other, but not with sentences in a neighboring subtopic. A third early model, the LSA Coherence method of Foltz et al. (1998) was the ﬁrst to use embeddings, modeling the coherence between two sentences as the cosine between their LSA sentence embedding vectors1, computing embeddings for a sentence s by summing the embeddings of its words w: sim(s,t) = cos(s,t) = cos( ∑ w∈s w, ∑ w∈t w) (24.31) and deﬁning the overall coherence of a text as the average similarity over all pairs of adjacent sentences si and si+1: coherence(T ) = 1 n− 1 n−1∑ i=1 cos(si,si+1) (24.32) Modern neural representation-learning coherence models, beginning with Li et al. (2014), draw on the intuitions of these early unsupervised models for learning sentence representations and measuring how they change between neighboring sentences. But the new models also draw on the idea pioneered by Barzilay and Lapata (2005) of self-supervision. That is, unlike say coherence relation models, which train on hand-labeled representations for RST or PDTB, these models are trained to distinguish natural discourses from unnatural discourses formed by scrambling the order of sentences, thus using representation learning to discover the features that matter for at least the ordering aspect of coherence. Here we present one such model, the local coherence discriminator (LCD) (Xu et al., 2019). Like early models, LCD computes the coherence of a text as the average of coherence scores between consecutive pairs of sentences. But unlike the early unsupervised models, LCD is a self-supervised model trained to discriminate consecutive sentence pairs (si,si+1) in the training documents (assumed to be coherent) from (constructed) incoherent pairs (si,s′). All consecutive pairs are positive examples, and the negative (incoherent) partner for a sentencesi is another sentence uniformly sampled from the same document as si. Fig. 24.11 describes the architecture of the model fθ , which takes a sentence pair and returns a score, higher scores for more coherent pairs. Given an input sentence pair s and t, the model computes sentence embeddings s and t (using any sentence embeddings algorithm), and then concatenates four features of the pair: (1) the concatenation of the two vectors (2) their difference s− t; (3) the absolute value of their difference |s− t|; (4) their element-wise product s⊙ t. These are passed through a one-layer feedforward network to output the coherence score. The model is trained to make this coherence score higher for real pairs than for negative pairs. More formally, the training objective for a corpusC of documents d, each of which consists of a list of sentences si, is: Lθ = ∑ d∈C ∑ si∈d E p(s′|si) [L( fθ (si,si+1), fθ (si,s′))] (24.33) Ep(s′|si) is the expectation with respect to the negative sampling distribution conditioned on si: given a sentence si the algorithms samples a negative sentence s′ 1 See Chapter 5 for more on LSA embeddings; they are computed by applying SVD to the termdocument matrix (each cell weighted by log frequency and normalized by entropy), and then the ﬁrst 300 dimensions are used as the embedding. Figure 24.11 The architecture of the LCD model of document coherence, showing the computation of the score for a pair of sentences s and t. Figure from Xu et al. (2019). uniformly over the other sentences in the same document. L is a loss function that takes two scores, one for a positive pair and one for a negative pair, with the goal of encouraging f + = fθ (si,si+1) to be high and f− = fθ (si,s′)) to be low. Fig. 24.11 use the margin loss l( f +, f−) = max(0, η− f + + f−) where η is the margin hyperparameter. Xu et al. (2019) also give a useful baseline algorithm that itself has quite high performance in measuring perplexity: train an RNN language model on the data, and compute the log likelihood of sentencesi in two ways, once given the preceding context (conditional log likelihood) and once with no context (marginal log likelihood). The difference between these values tells us how much the preceding context improved the predictability of si, a predictability measure of coherence. Training models to predict longer contexts than just consecutive pairs of sentences can result in even stronger discourse representations. For example a Transformer language model trained with a contrastive sentence objective to predict text up to a distance of±2 sentences improves performance on various discourse coherence tasks (Iter et al., 2020). Language-model style models are generally evaluated by the methods of Section 24.3.3, although they can also be evaluated on the RST and PDTB coherence relation tasks. 24.5 Global Coherence A discourse must also cohere globally rather than just at the level of pairs of sentences. Consider stories, for example. The narrative structure of stories is one of the oldest kinds of global coherence to be studied. In his inﬂuential Morphology of the Folktale, Propp (1968) models the discourse structure of Russian folktales via a kind of plot grammar. His model includes a set of character categories he called dramatis personae, like Hero, Villain, Donor, or Helper, and a set of events he called functions (like “Villain commits kidnapping”, “Donor tests Hero”, or “Hero 24.5 • G LOBAL COHERENCE 17 is pursued”) that have to occur in particular order, along with other components. Propp shows that the plots of each of the fairy tales he studies can be represented as a sequence of these functions, different tales choosing different subsets of functions, but always in the same order. Indeed Lakoff (1972) showed that Propp’s model amounted to a discourse grammar of stories, and in recent computational work Finlayson (2016) demonstrates that some of these Proppian functions could be induced from corpora of folktale texts by detecting events that have similar actions across stories. Bamman et al. (2013) showed that generalizations over dramatis personae could be induced from movie plot summaries on Wikipedia. Their model induced latent personae from features like the actions the character takes (e.g., Villains strangle), the actions done to them (e.g., Villains are foiled and arrested) or the descriptive words used of them (Villains are evil). In this section we introduce two kinds of such global discourse structure that have been widely studied computationally. The ﬁrst is the structure of arguments: the way people attempt to convince each other in persuasive essays by offering claims and supporting premises. The second is somewhat related: the structure of scientiﬁc papers, and the way authors present their goals, results, and relationship to prior work in their papers. 24.5.1 Argumentation Structure The ﬁrst type of global discourse structure is the structure ofarguments. Analyzing people’s argumentation computationally is often calledargumentation mining.argumentation mining The study of arguments dates back to Aristotle, who in his Rhetorics described three components of a good argument: pathos (appealing to the emotions of thepathos listener), ethos (appealing to the speaker’s personal character), andlogos (the logicalethos logos structure of the argument). Most of the discourse structure studies of argumentation have focused on logos, particularly via building and training on annotated datasets of persuasive essays or other arguments (Reed et al. 2008, Stab and Gurevych 2014a, Peldszus and Stede 2016, Habernal and Gurevych 2017, Musi et al. 2018). Such corpora, for example, often include annotations of argumentative components like claims (the centralclaims component of the argument that is controversial and needs support) and premisespremises (the reasons given by the author to persuade the reader by supporting or attacking the claim or other premises), as well as the argumentative relations between themargumentative relations like SUPPORT and ATTACK. Consider the following example of a persuasive essay from Stab and Gurevych (2014b). The ﬁrst sentence (1) presents a claim (in bold). (2) and (3) present two premises supporting the claim. (4) gives a premise supporting premise (3). “(1) Museums and art galleries provide a better understanding about arts than Internet. (2) In most museums and art galleries, detailed descriptions in terms of the background, history and author are provided. (3) Seeing an artwork online is not the same as watching it with our own eyes, as (4) the picture online does not show the texture or three-dimensional structure of the art, which is important to study.” Thus this example has three argumentative relations:SUPPORT (2,1), SUPPORT (3,1) and SUPPORT (4,3). Fig. 24.12 shows the structure of a much more complex argument. While argumentation mining is clearly related to rhetorical structure and other kinds of coherence relations, arguments tend to be much less local; often a persuaStab and Gurevych Parsing Argumentation Structures cloning. This example illustrates that knowing argumentative relations is important for separating several arguments in a paragraph. The example also shows that argument components frequently exhibit preceding text units that are not relevant to the argument but helpful for recognizing the argument component type. For example, preceding discourse connectors like “therefore”, “consequently”, or “thus” can signal a subsequent claim. Discourse markers like “because”, “since”, or “furthermore” could indicate a premise. Formally , thesepreceding tokens of an argument component starting at token ti are deﬁned as the tokens ti m, ..., ti 1 that are not covered by another argument component in the sentence s = t1, t2, ..., tn where 1  i  n and i   m   1. The third body paragraph illustrates a contra argument and argumentative attack relations: Admittedly, [ cloning could be misused for military purposes]Claim5. For example, [ :it :::::could:::be:::::used ::to::::::::::manipulate:::::::human::::::genes ::in::::::order ::to::::::create::::::::obedient :::::::soldiers ::::with ::::::::::::extraordinary :::::::abilities]Premise9. However, because [ ::::moral::::and:::::::ethical ::::::values :::are ::::::::::::internationally::::::shared]Premise10,[ :it:::is ::::very::::::::unlikely ::::that :::::::cloning ::::will ::be::::::::misused:::for ::::::militant:::::::::objectives]Premise11. The paragraph begins with Claim5, which attacks the stance of the author. It is supported by Premise9 in the second sentence. The third sentence includes two premises, both of which defend the stance of the author. Premise11 is an attack of Claim5, and Premise10 supports Premise11. The last paragraph (conclusion) restates the major claim and summarizes the main aspects of the essay: T o sum up, although [ permitting cloning might bear some risks like misuse for military purposes]Claim6, I strongly believe that [ this technology is beneﬁcial to humanity]MajorClaim2. It is likely that [ this technology bears some important cures which will significantly improve life conditions]Claim7. The conclusion of the essay starts with an attacking claim followed by the restatement of the major claim. The last sentence includes another claim that summarizes the most important points of the author’s argumentation. Figure 2 shows the entire argumentation structure of the example essay . Figure 2 Argumentation structure of the example essay . Arrows indicate argumentative relations. Arrowheads denote argumentative support relations and circleheads attack relations. Dashed lines indicate relations that are encoded in the stance attributes of claims. “P” denotes premises. Figure 24.12 Argumentation structure of a persuasive essay. Arrows indicate argumentation relations, either of SUPPORT (with arrowheads) or ATTACK (with circleheads); P denotes premises. Figure from Stab and Gurevych (2017). sive essay will have only a single main claim, with premises spread throughout the text, without the local coherence we see in coherence relations. Algorithms for detecting argumentation structure often include classiﬁers for distinguishing claims, premises, or non-argumentation, together with relation classiﬁers for deciding if two spans have the SUPPORT , ATTACK, or neither relation (Peldszus and Stede, 2013). While these are the main focus of much computational work, there is also preliminary efforts on annotating and detecting richer semantic relationships (Park and Cardie 2014, Hidey et al. 2017) such as detectingargumentation schemes, larger-scale structures for argument like argument from example,argumentation schemes or argument from cause to effect , or argument from consequences (Feng and Hirst, 2011). Another important line of research is studying how these argument structure (or other features) are associated with the success or persuasiveness of an argument (Habernal and Gurevych 2016, Tan et al. 2016, Hidey et al. 2017. Indeed, while it is Aristotle’s logos that is most related to discourse structure, Aristotle’s ethos and pathos techniques are particularly relevant in the detection of mechanisms of this sort of persuasion. For example scholars have investigated the linguistic realizationpersuasion of features studied by social scientists like reciprocity (people return favors), social proof (people follow others’ choices), authority (people are inﬂuenced by those with power), and scarcity (people value things that are scarce), all of which can be brought up in a persuasive argument (Cialdini, 1984). Rosenthal and McKeown (2017) showed that these features could be combined with argumentation structure to predict who inﬂuences whom on social media, Althoff et al. (2014) found that linguistic models of reciprocity and authority predicted success in online requests, while the semisupervised model of Yang et al. (2019) detected mentions of scarcity, commitment, and social identity to predict the success of peer-to-peer lending platforms. See Stede and Schneider (2018) for a comprehensive survey of argument mining. 24.6 • S UMMARY 19 24.5.2 The structure of scientiﬁc discourse Scientiﬁc papers have a very speciﬁc global structure: somewhere in the course of the paper the authors must indicate a scientiﬁc goal, develop a method for a solution, provide evidence for the solution, and compare to prior work. One popular annotation scheme for modeling these rhetorical goals is the argumentative zoning model of Teufel et al. (1999) and Teufel et al. (2009), which is informed by theargumentative zoning idea that each scientiﬁc paper tries to make a knowledge claim about a new piece of knowledge being added to the repository of the ﬁeld (Myers, 1992). Sentences in a scientiﬁc paper can be assigned one of 15 tags; Fig. 24.13 shows 7 (shortened) examples of labeled sentences. Category Description Example AIM Statement of speciﬁc research goal, or hypothesis of current paper “The aim of this process is to examine the role that training plays in the tagging process” OWN METHOD New Knowledge claim, own work: methods “In order for it to be useful for our purposes, the following extensions must be made:” OWN RESULTS Measurable/objective outcome of own work “All the curves have a generally upward trend but always lie far below backoff (51% error rate)” USE Other work is used in own work “We use the framework for the allocation and transfer of control of Whittaker....” GAP WEAK Lack of solution in ﬁeld, problem with other solutions “Here, we will produce experimental evidence suggesting that this simple model leads to serious overestimates” SUPPORT Other work supports current work or is supported by current work “Work similar to that described here has been carried out by Merialdo (1994), with broadly similar conclusions.” ANTISUPPORT Clash with other’s results or theory; superiority of own work “This result challenges the claims of...” Figure 24.13 Examples for 7 of the 15 labels from the Argumentative Zoning labelset (Teufel et al., 2009). Teufel et al. (1999) and Teufel et al. (2009) develop labeled corpora of scientiﬁc articles from computational linguistics and chemistry, which can be used as supervision for training standard sentence-classiﬁcation architecture to assign the 15 labels. 24.6 Summary In this chapter we introduced local and global models for discourse coherence. • Discourses are not arbitrary collections of sentences; they must be coherent. Among the factors that make a discourse coherent are coherence relations between the sentences, entity-based coherence, and topical coherence. • Various sets of coherence relations and rhetorical relations have been proposed. The relations in Rhetorical Structure Theory ( RST) hold between spans of text and are structured into a tree. Because of this, shift-reduce and other parsing algorithms are generally used to assign these structures. The Penn Discourse Treebank (PDTB) labels only relations between pairs of spans, and the labels are generally assigned by sequence models. • Entity-based coherence captures the intuition that discourses are about an entity, and continue mentioning the entity from sentence to sentence. Centering Theory is a family of models describing how salience is modeled for discourse entities, and hence how coherence is achieved by virtue of keeping the same discourse entities salient over the discourse. The entity grid model gives a more bottom-up way to compute which entity realization transitions lead to coherence. • Many different genres have different types of global coherence. Persuasive essays have claims and premises that are extracted in the ﬁeld of argument mining, scientiﬁc articles have structure related to aims, methods, results, and comparisons. Historical Notes Coherence relations arose from the independent development of a number of scholars, including Hobbs (1979) idea that coherence relations play an inferential role for the hearer, and the investigations by Mann and Thompson (1987) of the discourse structure of large texts. Other approaches to coherence relations and their extraction include Segmented Discourse Representation Theory (SDRT) (Asher and Las-SDRT carides 2003, Baldridge et al. 2007) and the Linguistic Discourse Model (Polanyi 1988, Scha and Polanyi 1988, Polanyi et al. 2004). Wolf and Gibson (2005) argue that coherence structure includes crossed bracketings, which make it impossible to represent as a tree, and propose a graph representation instead. A compendium of over 350 relations that have been proposed in the literature can be found in Hovy (1990). RST parsing was ﬁrst proposed by Marcu (1997), and early work was rule-based, focused on discourse markers (Marcu, 2000a). The creation of the RST Discourse TreeBank (Carlson et al. 2001, Carlson and Marcu 2001) enabled a wide variety of machine learning algorithms, beginning with the shift-reduce parser of Marcu (1999) that used decision trees to choose actions, and continuing with a wide variety of machine learned parsing methods (Soricut and Marcu 2003, Sagae 2009, Hernault et al. 2010, Feng and Hirst 2014, Surdeanu et al. 2015, Joty et al. 2015) and chunkers (Sporleder and Lapata, 2005). Subba and Di Eugenio (2009) integrated sophisticated semantic information into RST parsing. Ji and Eisenstein (2014) ﬁrst applied neural models to RST parsing neural models, leading to the modern set of neural RST models (Li et al. 2014, Li et al. 2016, Braud et al. 2017, Yu et al. 2018, inter alia) as well as neural segmenters (Wang et al. 2018). and neural PDTB parsing models (Ji and Eisenstein 2015, Qin et al. 2016, Qin et al. 2017). Barzilay and Lapata (2005) pioneered the idea of self-supervision for coherence: training a coherence model to distinguish true orderings of sentences from random permutations. Li et al. (2014) ﬁrst applied this paradigm to neural sentencerepresentation, and many neural self-supervised models followed (Li and Jurafsky 2017, Logeswaran et al. 2018, Lai and Tetreault 2018, Xu et al. 2019, Iter et al. 2020) Another aspect of global coherence is the global topic structure of a text, the way the topics shift over the course of the document. Barzilay and Lee (2004) introduced an HMM model for capturing topics for coherence, and later work expanded this intuition (Soricut and Marcu 2006, Elsner et al. 2007, Louis and Nenkova 2012, Li and Jurafsky 2017). The relationship between explicit and implicit discourse connectives has been a fruitful one for research. Marcu and Echihabi (2002) ﬁrst proposed to use senHISTORICAL NOTES 21 tences with explicit relations to help provide training data for implicit relations, by removing the explicit relations and trying to re-predict them as a way of improving performance on implicit connectives; this idea was reﬁned by Sporleder and Lascarides (2005), (Pitler et al., 2009), and Rutherford and Xue (2015). This relationship can also be used as a way to create discourse-aware representations. The DisSent algorithm (Nie et al., 2019) creates the task of predicting explicit discourse markers between two sentences. They show that representations learned to be good at this task also function as powerful sentence representations for other discourse tasks. The idea of entity-based coherence seems to have arisen in multiple ﬁelds in the mid-1970s, in functional linguistics (Chafe, 1976), in the psychology of discourse processing (Kintsch and Van Dijk, 1978), and in the roughly contemporaneous work of Grosz, Sidner, Joshi, and their colleagues. Grosz (1977) addressed the focus of attention that conversational participants maintain as the discourse unfolds. She deﬁned two levels of focus; entities relevant to the entire discourse were said to be in global focus, whereas entities that are locally in focus (i.e., most central to a particular utterance) were said to be in immediate focus. Sidner 1979; 1983 described a method for tracking (immediate) discourse foci and their use in resolving pronouns and demonstrative noun phrases. She made a distinction between the current discourse focus and potential foci, which are the predecessors to the backwardand forward-looking centers of Centering theory, respectively. The name and further roots of the centering approach lie in papers by Joshi and Kuhn (1979) and Joshi and Weinstein (1981), who addressed the relationship between immediate focus and the inferences required to integrate the current utterance into the discourse model. Grosz et al. (1983) integrated this work with the prior work of Sidner and Grosz. This led to a manuscript on centering which, while widely circulated since 1986, remained unpublished until Grosz et al. (1995). A collection of centering papers appears in Walker et al. (1998). See Karamanis et al. (2004) and Poesio et al. (2004) for a deeper exploration of centering and its parameterizations, and the History section of Chapter 23 for more on the use of centering on coreference. The grid model of entity-based coherence was ﬁrst proposed by Barzilay and Lapata (2005) drawing on earlier work by Lapata (2003) and Barzilay, and then extended by them Barzilay and Lapata (2008) and others with additional features (Elsner and Charniak 2008, 2011, Feng et al. 2014, Lin et al. 2011) a model that projects entities into a global graph for the discourse (Guinaudeau and Strube 2013, Mesgar and Strube 2016), and a convolutional model to capture longer-range entity dependencies (Nguyen and Joty, 2017). Theories of discourse coherence have also been used in algorithms for interpreting discourse-level linguistic phenomena, including verb phrase ellipsis and gapping (Asher 1993, Kehler 1993), and tense interpretation (Lascarides and Asher 1993, Kehler 1994, Kehler 2000). An extensive investigation into the relationship between coherence relations and discourse connectives can be found in Knott and Dale (1994). Useful surveys of discourse processing and structure include Stede (2011) and Webber et al. (2012). Andy Kehler wrote the Discourse chapter for the 2000 ﬁrst edition of this textbook, which we used as the starting point for the second-edition chapter, and there are some remnants of Andy’s lovely prose still in this third-edition coherence chapter. Exercises 24.1 Finish the Centering Theory processing of the last two utterances of (24.30), and show how (24.29) would be processed. Does the algorithm indeed mark (24.29) as less coherent? 24.2 Select an editorial column from your favorite newspaper, and determine the discourse structure for a 10–20 sentence portion. What problems did you encounter? Were you helped by superﬁcial cues the speaker included (e.g., discourse connectives) in any places? Exercises 23 Althoff, T., C. Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, and D. Jurafsky. 2014. How to ask for a favor: A case study on the success of altruistic requests. ICWSM 2014. Asher, N. 1993. Reference to Abstract Objects in Discourse. Studies in Linguistics and Philosophy (SLAP) 50, Kluwer. Asher, N. and A. Lascarides. 2003. Logics of Conversation. Cambridge University Press. Baldridge, J., N. Asher, and J. Hunter. 2007. Annotation for and robust parsing of discourse structure on unrestricted texts. Zeitschrift f¨ur Sprachwissenschaft, 26:213–239. Bamman, D., B. O’Connor, and N. A. Smith. 2013. Learning latent personas of ﬁlm characters. ACL. Barzilay, R. and M. Lapata. 2005. Modeling local coherence: An entity-based approach. ACL. Barzilay, R. and M. Lapata. 2008. Modeling local coherence: An entity-based approach. Computational Linguistics, 34(1):1–34. Barzilay, R. and L. Lee. 2004. Catching the drift: Probabilistic content models, with applications to generation and summarization. HLT-NAACL. Bedi, G., F. Carrillo, G. A. Cecchi, D. F. Slezak, M. Sigman, N. B. Mota, S. Ribeiro, D. C. Javitt, M. Copelli, and C. M. Corcoran. 2015. Automated analysis of free speech predicts psychosis onset in high-risk youths. npj Schizophrenia, 1. Biran, O. and K. McKeown. 2015. PDTB discourse parsing as a tagging task: The two taggers approach. SIGDIAL. Braud, C., M. Coavoux, and A. Søgaard. 2017. Cross-lingual RST discourse parsing. EACL. Brennan, S. E., M. W. Friedman, and C. Pollard. 1987. A centering approach to pronouns. ACL. Carlson, L. and D. Marcu. 2001. Discourse tagging manual. Technical Report ISI-TR-545, ISI. Carlson, L., D. Marcu, and M. E. Okurowski. 2001. Building a discourse-tagged corpus in the framework of rhetorical structure theory. SIGDIAL. Chafe, W. L. 1976. Givenness, contrastiveness, deﬁniteness, subjects, topics, and point of view. In C. N. Li, ed., Subject and Topic, 25–55. Academic Press. Chen, E., B. Snyder, and R. Barzilay. 2007. Incremental text structuring with online hierarchical ranking. EMNLP/CoNLL. Cialdini, R. B. 1984. Inﬂuence: The psychology of persuasion. Morrow. Ditman, T. and G. R. Kuperberg. 2010. Building coherence: A framework for exploring the breakdown of links across clause boundaries in schizophrenia. Journal of neurolinguistics, 23(3):254–269. Elsner, M., J. Austerweil, and E. Charniak. 2007. A uniﬁed local and global model for discourse coherence. NAACLHLT. Elsner, M. and E. Charniak. 2008. Coreference-inspired coherence modeling. ACL. Elsner, M. and E. Charniak. 2011. Extending the entity grid with entity-speciﬁc features. ACL. Elvev˚ag, B., P. W. Foltz, D. R. Weinberger, and T. E. Goldberg. 2007. Quantifying incoherence in speech: an automated methodology and novel application to schizophrenia. Schizophrenia research, 93(1-3):304–316. Feng, V . W. and G. Hirst. 2011. Classifying arguments by scheme. ACL. Feng, V . W. and G. Hirst. 2014. A linear-time bottom-up discourse parser with constraints and post-editing. ACL. Feng, V . W., Z. Lin, and G. Hirst. 2014. The impact of deep hierarchical discourse structures in the evaluation of text coherence. COLING. Finlayson, M. A. 2016. Inferring Propp’s functions from semantically annotated text. The Journal of American Folklore, 129(511):55–77. Foltz, P. W., W. Kintsch, and T. K. Landauer. 1998. The measurement of textual coherence with latent semantic analysis. Discourse processes, 25(2-3):285–307. Grosz, B. J. 1977. The representation and use of focus in a system for understanding dialogs. IJCAI-77. Morgan Kaufmann. Grosz, B. J., A. K. Joshi, and S. Weinstein. 1983. Providing a uniﬁed account of deﬁnite noun phrases in English. ACL. Grosz, B. J., A. K. Joshi, and S. Weinstein. 1995. Centering: A framework for modeling the local coherence of discourse. Computational Linguistics, 21(2):203–225. Guinaudeau, C. and M. Strube. 2013. Graph-based local coherence modeling. ACL. Habernal, I. and I. Gurevych. 2016. Which argument is more convincing? Analyzing and predicting convincingness of Web arguments using bidirectional LSTM. ACL. Habernal, I. and I. Gurevych. 2017. Argumentation mining in user-generated web discourse. Computational Linguistics, 43(1):125–179. Halliday, M. A. K. and R. Hasan. 1976.Cohesion in English. Longman. English Language Series, Title No. 9. Hearst, M. A. 1997. Texttiling: Segmenting text into multiparagraph subtopic passages. Computational Linguistics, 23:33–64. Hernault, H., H. Prendinger, D. A. duVerle, and M. Ishizuka. 2010. Hilda: A discourse parser using support vector machine classiﬁcation. Dialogue & Discourse, 1(3). Hidey, C., E. Musi, A. Hwang, S. Muresan, and K. McKeown. 2017. Analyzing the semantic types of claims and premises in an online persuasive forum. 4th Workshop on Argument Mining. Hobbs, J. R. 1979. Coherence and coreference. Cognitive Science, 3:67–90. Hovy, E. H. 1990. Parsimonious and proﬂigate approaches to the question of discourse structure relations. Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop on Natural Language Generation. Iter, D., K. Guu, L. Lansing, and D. Jurafsky. 2020. Pretraining with contrastive sentence objectives improves discourse performance of language models. ACL. Iter, D., J. Yoon, and D. Jurafsky. 2018. Automatic detection of incoherent speech for diagnosing schizophrenia. Fifth Workshop on Computational Linguistics and Clinical Psychology. Ji, Y . and J. Eisenstein. 2014. Representation learning for text-level discourse parsing. ACL. Ji, Y . and J. Eisenstein. 2015. One vector is not enough: Entity-augmented distributed semantics for discourse relations. TACL, 3:329–344. Joshi, A. K. and S. Kuhn. 1979. Centered logic: The role of entity centered sentence representation in natural language inferencing. IJCAI-79. Joshi, A. K. and S. Weinstein. 1981. Control of inference: Role of some aspects of discourse structure – centering. IJCAI-81. Joty, S., G. Carenini, and R. T. Ng. 2015. CODRA: A novel discriminative framework for rhetorical analysis.Computational Linguistics, 41(3):385–435. Karamanis, N., M. Poesio, C. Mellish, and J. Oberlander. 2004. Evaluating centering-based metrics of coherence for text structuring using a reliably annotated corpus. ACL. Kehler, A. 1993. The effect of establishing coherence in ellipsis and anaphora resolution. ACL. Kehler, A. 1994. Temporal relations: Reference or discourse coherence? ACL. Kehler, A. 2000. Coherence, Reference, and the Theory of Grammar. CSLI Publications. Kintsch, W. and T. A. Van Dijk. 1978. Toward a model of text comprehension and production. Psychological review, 85(5):363–394. Knott, A. and R. Dale. 1994. Using linguistic phenomena to motivate a set of coherence relations. Discourse Processes, 18(1):35–62. Lai, A. and J. Tetreault. 2018. Discourse coherence in the wild: A dataset, evaluation and methods. SIGDIAL. Lakoff, G. 1972. Structural complexity in fairy tales. In The Study of Man , 128–50. School of Social Sciences, University of California, Irvine, CA. Lapata, M. 2003. Probabilistic text structuring: Experiments with sentence ordering. ACL. Lascarides, A. and N. Asher. 1993. Temporal interpretation, discourse relations, and common sense entailment. Linguistics and Philosophy, 16(5):437–493. Li, J. and D. Jurafsky. 2017. Neural net models of opendomain discourse coherence. EMNLP. Li, J., R. Li, and E. H. Hovy. 2014. Recursive deep models for discourse parsing. EMNLP. Li, Q., T. Li, and B. Chang. 2016. Discourse parsing with attention-based hierarchical neural networks. EMNLP. Lin, Z., M.-Y . Kan, and H. T. Ng. 2009. Recognizing implicit discourse relations in the Penn Discourse Treebank. EMNLP. Lin, Z., H. T. Ng, and M.-Y . Kan. 2011. Automatically evaluating text coherence using discourse relations. ACL. Lin, Z., H. T. Ng, and M.-Y . Kan. 2014. A pdtb-styled endto-end discourse parser. Natural Language Engineering, 20(2):151–184. Logeswaran, L., H. Lee, and D. Radev. 2018. Sentence ordering and coherence modeling using recurrent neural networks. AAAI. Louis, A. and A. Nenkova. 2012. A coherence model based on syntactic patterns. EMNLP. Lukasik, M., B. Dadachev, K. Papineni, and G. Sim ˜oes. 2020. Text segmentation by cross segment attention. EMNLP. Mann, W. C. and S. A. Thompson. 1987. Rhetorical structure theory: A theory of text organization. Technical Report RS-87-190, Information Sciences Institute. Marcu, D. 1997. The rhetorical parsing of natural language texts. ACL. Marcu, D. 1999. A decision-based approach to rhetorical parsing. ACL. Marcu, D. 2000a. The rhetorical parsing of unrestricted texts: A surface-based approach. Computational Linguistics, 26(3):395–448. Marcu, D., ed. 2000b. The Theory and Practice of Discourse Parsing and Summarization. MIT Press. Marcu, D. and A. Echihabi. 2002. An unsupervised approach to recognizing discourse relations. ACL. Mesgar, M. and M. Strube. 2016. Lexical coherence graph modeling using word embeddings. ACL. Miltsakaki, E., R. Prasad, A. K. Joshi, and B. L. Webber. 2004. The Penn Discourse Treebank. LREC. Morey, M., P. Muller, and N. Asher. 2017. How much progress have we made on RST discourse parsing? a replication study of recent results on the rst-dt. EMNLP. Morris, J. and G. Hirst. 1991. Lexical cohesion computed by thesaural relations as an indicator of the structure of text. Computational Linguistics, 17(1):21–48. Muller, P., C. Braud, and M. Morey. 2019. ToNy: Contextual embeddings for accurate multilingual discourse segmentation of full documents.Workshop on Discourse Relation Parsing and Treebanking. Musi, E., M. Stede, L. Kriese, S. Muresan, and A. Rocci. 2018. A multi-layer annotated corpus of argumentative text: From argument schemes to discourse relations. LREC. Myers, G. 1992. “In this paper we report...”: Speech acts and scientiﬁc facts. Journal of Pragmatics, 17(4):295–313. Nguyen, D. T. and S. Joty. 2017. A neural local coherence model. ACL. Nie, A., E. Bennett, and N. Goodman. 2019. DisSent: Learning sentence representations from explicit discourse relations. ACL. Park, J. and C. Cardie. 2014. Identifying appropriate support for propositions in online user comments. First workshop on argumentation mining. Peldszus, A. and M. Stede. 2013. From argument diagrams to argumentation mining in texts: A survey.International Journal of Cognitive Informatics and Natural Intelligence (IJCINI), 7(1):1–31. Peldszus, A. and M. Stede. 2016. An annotated corpus of argumentative microtexts. 1st European Conference on Argumentation. Pitler, E., A. Louis, and A. Nenkova. 2009. Automatic sense prediction for implicit discourse relations in text. ACL IJCNLP. Pitler, E. and A. Nenkova. 2009. Using syntax to disambiguate explicit discourse connectives in text. ACL IJCNLP. Exercises 25 Poesio, M., R. Stevenson, B. Di Eugenio, and J. Hitzeman. 2004. Centering: A parametric theory and its instantiations. Computational Linguistics, 30(3):309–363. Polanyi, L. 1988. A formal model of the structure of discourse. Journal of Pragmatics, 12. Polanyi, L., C. Culy, M. van den Berg, G. L. Thione, and D. Ahn. 2004. A rule based approach to discourse parsing. Proceedings of SIGDIAL. Prasad, R., N. Dinesh, A. Lee, E. Miltsakaki, L. Robaldo, A. K. Joshi, and B. L. Webber. 2008. The Penn Discourse TreeBank 2.0. LREC. Prasad, R., B. L. Webber, and A. Joshi. 2014. Reﬂections on the Penn Discourse Treebank, comparable corpora, and complementary annotation. Computational Linguistics, 40(4):921–950. Propp, V . 1968. Morphology of the Folktale , 2nd edition. University of Texas Press. Original Russian 1928. Translated by Laurence Scott. Qin, L., Z. Zhang, and H. Zhao. 2016. A stacking gated neural architecture for implicit discourse relation classiﬁcation. EMNLP. Qin, L., Z. Zhang, H. Zhao, Z. Hu, and E. Xing. 2017. Adversarial connective-exploiting networks for implicit discourse relation classiﬁcation. ACL. Reed, C., R. Mochales Palau, G. Rowe, and M.-F. Moens. 2008. Language resources for studying argument. LREC. Rosenthal, S. and K. McKeown. 2017. Detecting inﬂuencers in multiple online genres. ACM Transactions on Internet Technology (TOIT), 17(2). Rutherford, A. and N. Xue. 2015. Improving the inference of implicit discourse relations via classifying explicit discourse connectives. NAACL HLT. Sagae, K. 2009. Analysis of discourse structure with syntactic dependencies and data-driven shift-reduce parsing. IWPT-09. Scha, R. and L. Polanyi. 1988. An augmented context free grammar for discourse. COLING. Sidner, C. L. 1979. Towards a computational theory of deﬁnite anaphora comprehension in English discourse. Technical Report 537, MIT Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory, Cambridge, MA. Sidner, C. L. 1983. Focusing in the comprehension of deﬁnite anaphora. In M. Brady and R. C. Berwick, eds,Computational Models of Discourse, 267–330. MIT Press. Somasundaran, S., J. Burstein, and M. Chodorow. 2014. Lexical chaining for measuring discourse coherence quality in test-taker essays. COLING. Soricut, R. and D. Marcu. 2003. Sentence level discourse parsing using syntactic and lexical information. HLTNAACL. Soricut, R. and D. Marcu. 2006. Discourse generation using utility-trained coherence models. COLING/ACL. Sporleder, C. and A. Lascarides. 2005. Exploiting linguistic cues to classify rhetorical relations. RANLP-05. Sporleder, C. and M. Lapata. 2005. Discourse chunking and its application to sentence compression. EMNLP. Stab, C. and I. Gurevych. 2014a. Annotating argument components and relations in persuasive essays. COLING. Stab, C. and I. Gurevych. 2014b. Identifying argumentative discourse structures in persuasive essays. EMNLP. Stab, C. and I. Gurevych. 2017. Parsing argumentation structures in persuasive essays. Computational Linguistics , 43(3):619–659. Stede, M. 2011. Discourse processing. Morgan & Claypool. Stede, M. and J. Schneider. 2018. Argumentation Mining. Morgan & Claypool. Subba, R. and B. Di Eugenio. 2009. An effective discourse parser that uses rich linguistic information. NAACL HLT. Surdeanu, M., T. Hicks, and M. A. Valenzuela-Escarcega. 2015. Two practical rhetorical structure theory parsers. NAACL HLT. Tan, C., V . Niculae, C. Danescu-Niculescu-Mizil, and L. Lee. 2016. Winning arguments: Interaction dynamics and persuasion strategies in good-faith online discussions. WWW-16. Teufel, S., J. Carletta, and M. Moens. 1999. An annotation scheme for discourse-level argumentation in research articles. EACL. Teufel, S., A. Siddharthan, and C. Batchelor. 2009. Towards domain-independent argumentative zoning: Evidence from chemistry and computational linguistics. EMNLP. Walker, M. A., A. K. Joshi, and E. Prince, eds. 1998. Centering in Discourse. Oxford University Press. Wang, Y ., S. Li, and J. Yang. 2018. Toward fast and accurate neural discourse segmentation. EMNLP. Webber, B. L., M. Egg, and V . Kordoni. 2012. Discourse structure and language technology. Natural Language Engineering, 18(4):437–490. Wolf, F. and E. Gibson. 2005. Representing discourse coherence: A corpus-based analysis. Computational Linguistics, 31(2):249–287. Xu, P., H. Saghir, J. S. Kang, T. Long, A. J. Bose, Y . Cao, and J. C. K. Cheung. 2019. A cross-domain transferable neural coherence model. ACL. Xue, N., H. T. Ng, S. Pradhan, A. Rutherford, B. L. Webber, C. Wang, and H. Wang. 2016. CoNLL 2016 shared task on multilingual shallow discourse parsing. CoNLL16 shared task. Yang, D., J. Chen, Z. Yang, D. Jurafsky, and E. H. Hovy. 2019. Let’s make your request more persuasive: Modeling persuasive strategies via semi-supervised neural nets on crowdfunding platforms. NAACL HLT. Yu, N., M. Zhang, and G. Fu. 2018. Transition-based neural RST parsing with implicit syntax features. COLING. Yu, Y ., Y . Zhu, Y . Liu, Y . Liu, S. Peng, M. Gong, and A. Zeldes. 2019. GumDrop at the DISRPT2019 shared task: A model stacking approach to discourse unit segmentation and connective detection. Workshop on Discourse Relation Parsing and Treebanking 2019. Zhou, Y . and N. Xue. 2015. The Chinese Discourse TreeBank: a Chinese corpus annotated with discourse relations. Language Resources and Evaluation , 49(2):397– 431.