Speech and Language Processing. Daniel Jurafsky & James H. Martin. Copyright © 2026. All rights reserved. Draft of January 6, 2026. CHAPTER N-gram Language Models “You are uniformly charming!” cried he, with a smile of associating and now and then I bowed and they perceived a chaise and four to wish for. Random sentence generated from a Jane Austen trigram model Predicting is difﬁcult—especially about the future, as the old quip goes. But how about predicting something that seems much easier, like the next word someone is going to say? What word, for example, is likely to follow The water of Walden Pond is so beautifully ... You might conclude that a likely word is blue, or green, or clear, but probably not refrigerator nor this. In this chapter we formalize this intuition by introducing n-gram language models or LMs. A language model is a machine learninglanguage model LM model that predicts upcoming words. More formally, a language model assigns a probability to each possible next word, or equivalently gives a probability distribution over possible next words. Language models can also assign a probability to an entire sentence. Thus an LM could tell us that the following sequence has a much higher probability of appearing in a text: all of a sudden I notice three guys standing on the sidewalk than does this same set of words in a different order: on guys all I of notice sidewalk three a sudden standing the Why would we want to predict upcoming words? The main reason is that large language models are built just by training them to predict words!! As we’ll see in chapters 5-9, large language models learn an enormous amount about language solely from being trained to predict upcoming words from neighboring words. This probabilistic knowledge can be very practical. Consider correcting grammar or spelling errors likeTheir are two midterms , in whichThere was mistyped as Their, or Everything has improve , in which improve should have been improved. The phrase There are is more probable than Their are , and has improved than has improve , so a language model can help users select the more grammatical variant. Or for a speech system to recognize that you said I will be back soonish and not I will be bassoon dish , it helps to know thatback soonish is a more probable sequence. Language models can also help in augmentative and alternative communication (Trnka et al. 2007, Kane et al. 2017). People can use AACAAC systems if they are physically unable to speak or sign but can instead use eye gaze or other movements to select words from a menu. Word prediction can be used to suggest likely words for the menu. In this chapter we introduce the simplest kind of language model: the n-gramn-gram language model. An n-gram is a sequence of n words: a 2-gram (which we’ll call bigram) is a two-word sequence of words like The water , or water of , and a 3gram (a trigram) is a three-word sequence of words like The water of , or water of Walden . But we also (in a bit of terminological ambiguity) use the word ‘ngram’ to mean a probabilistic model that can estimate the probability of a word given the n-1 previous words, and thereby also to assign probabilities to entire sequences. In later chapters we will introduce the much more powerful neural large language models, based on the transformer architecture of Chapter 8. But because n-grams have a remarkably simple and clear formalization, we use them to introduce some major concepts of large language modeling, including training and test sets, perplexity, sampling, and interpolation. 3.1 N-Grams Let’s begin with the task of computing P(w|h), the probability of a word w given some history h. Suppose the history h is “The water of Walden Pond is so beautifully ” and we want to know the probability that the next word is blue: P(blue|The water of Walden Pond is so beautifully ) (3.1) One way to estimate this probability is directly from relative frequency counts: take a very large corpus, count the number of times we seeThe water of Walden Pond is so beautifully , and count the number of times this is followed byblue. This would be answering the question “Out of the times we saw the history h, how many times was it followed by the word w”, as follows: P(blue|The water of Walden Pond is so beautifully ) = C(The water of Walden Pond is so beautifully blue ) C(The water of Walden Pond is so beautifully ) (3.2) If we had a large enough corpus, we could compute these two counts and estimate the probability from Eq. 3.2. But even the entire web isn’t big enough to give us good estimates for counts of entire sentences. This is because language is creative; new sentences are invented all the time, and we can’t expect to get accurate counts for such large objects as entire sentences. For this reason, we’ll need more clever ways to estimate the probability of a word w given a history h, or the probability of an entire word sequence W. Let’s start with some notation. First, throughout this chapter we’ll continue to refer to words, although in practice we usually compute language models over tokens like the BPE tokens of page ??. To represent the probability of a particular random variable Xi taking on the value “the”, or P(Xi = “the”), we will use the simpliﬁcation P(the). We’ll represent a sequence of n words either as w1 . . .wn or w1:n. Thus the expression w1:n−1 means the string w1,w2, ...,wn−1, but we’ll also be using the equivalent notation w<n, which can be read as “all the elements of w from w1 up to and including wn−1”. For the joint probability of each word in a sequence having a particular value P(X1 = w1,X2 = w2,X3 = w3, ...,Xn = wn) we’ll use P(w1,w2, ...,wn). Now, how can we compute probabilities of entire sequences likeP(w1,w2, ...,wn)? One thing we can do is decompose this probability using the chain rule of proba3.1 • N-G RAMS 3 bility: P(X1...Xn) = P(X1)P(X2|X1)P(X3|X1:2) . . .P(Xn|X1:n−1) = n∏ k=1 P(Xk|X1:k−1) (3.3) Applying the chain rule to words, we get P(w1:n) = P(w1)P(w2|w1)P(w3|w1:2) . . .P(wn|w1:n−1) = n∏ k=1 P(wk|w1:k−1) (3.4) The chain rule shows the link between computing the joint probability of a sequence and computing the conditional probability of a word given previous words. Equation 3.4 suggests that we could estimate the joint probability of an entire sequence of words by multiplying together a number of conditional probabilities. But using the chain rule doesn’t really seem to help us! We don’t know any way to compute the exact probability of a word given a long sequence of preceding words,P(wn|w1:n−1). As we said above, we can’t just estimate by counting the number of times every word occurs following every long string in some corpus, because language is creative and any particular context might have never occurred before! 3.1.1 The Markov assumption The intuition of the n-gram model is that instead of computing the probability of a word given its entire history, we can approximate the history by just the last few words. The bigram model, for example, approximates the probability of a word givenbigram all the previous words P(wn|w1:n−1) by using only the conditional probability given the preceding word P(wn|wn−1). In other words, instead of computing the probability P(blue|The water of Walden Pond is so beautifully ) (3.5) we approximate it with the probability P(blue|beautifully) (3.6) When we use a bigram model to predict the conditional probability of the next word, we are thus making the following approximation: P(wn|w1:n−1)≈ P(wn|wn−1) (3.7) The assumption that the probability of a word depends only on the previous word is called a Markov assumption. Markov models are the class of probabilistic modelsMarkov that assume we can predict the probability of some future unit without looking too far into the past. We can generalize the bigram (which looks one word into the past) to the trigram (which looks two words into the past) and thus to the n-gram (whichn-gram looks n− 1 words into the past). Let’s see a general equation for this n-gram approximation to the conditional probability of the next word in a sequence. We’ll use N here to mean the n-gram size, so N = 2 means bigrams and N = 3 means trigrams. Then we approximate the probability of a word given its entire context as follows: P(wn|w1:n−1)≈ P(wn|wn−N+1:n−1) (3.8) Given the bigram assumption for the probability of an individual word, we can compute the probability of a complete word sequence by substituting Eq. 3.7 into Eq. 3.4: P(w1:n)≈ n∏ k=1 P(wk|wk−1) (3.9) 3.1.2 How to estimate probabilities How do we estimate these bigram or n-gram probabilities? An intuitive way to estimate probabilities is called maximum likelihood estimation or MLE. We get maximum likelihood estimation the MLE estimate for the parameters of an n-gram model by getting counts from a corpus, and normalizing the counts so that they lie between 0 and 1. For proba-normalize bilistic models, normalizing means dividing by some total count so that the resulting probabilities fall between 0 and 1 and sum to 1. For example, to compute a particular bigram probability of a word wn given a previous word wn−1, we’ll compute the count of the bigramC(wn−1wn) and normalize by the sum of all the bigrams that share the same ﬁrst word wn−1: P(wn|wn−1) = C(wn−1wn)∑ wC(wn−1w) (3.10) We can simplify this equation, since the sum of all bigram counts that start with a given wordwn−1 must be equal to the unigram count for that wordwn−1 (the reader should take a moment to be convinced of this): P(wn|wn−1) = C(wn−1wn) C(wn−1) (3.11) Let’s work through an example using a mini-corpus of three sentences. We’ll ﬁrst need to augment each sentence with a special symbol <s> at the beginning of the sentence, to give us the bigram context of the ﬁrst word. We’ll also need a special end-symbol </s>.1 <s> I am Sam </s> <s> Sam I am </s> <s> I do not like green eggs and ham </s> Here are the calculations for some of the bigram probabilities from this corpus P(I|<s>) = 2 3 = 0.67 P(Sam|<s>) = 1 3 = 0.33 P(am|I) = 2 3 = 0.67 P(</s>|Sam) = 1 2 = 0.5 P(Sam|am) = 1 2 = 0.5 P(do|I) = 1 3 = 0.33 For the general case of MLE n-gram parameter estimation: P(wn|wn−N+1:n−1) = C(wn−N+1:n−1 wn) C(wn−N+1:n−1) (3.12) 1 We need the end-symbol to make the bigram grammar a true probability distribution. Without an endsymbol, instead of the sentence probabilities of all sentences summing to one, the sentence probabilities for all sentencesof a given lengthwould sum to one. This model would deﬁne an inﬁnite set of probability distributions, with one distribution per sentence length. See Exercise 3.5. 3.1 • N-G RAMS 5 Equation 3.12 (like Eq. 3.11) estimates the n-gram probability by dividing the observed frequency of a particular sequence by the observed frequency of a preﬁx. This ratio is called a relative frequency. We said above that this use of relativerelative frequency frequencies as a way to estimate probabilities is an example of maximum likelihood estimation or MLE. In MLE, the resulting parameter set maximizes the likelihood of the training set T given the model M (i.e., P(T|M)). For example, suppose the word Chinese occurs 400 times in a corpus of a million words. What is the probability that a random word selected from some other text of, say, a million words will be the word Chinese? The MLE of its probability is 400 1000000 or 0.0004. Now 0.0004 is not the best possible estimate of the probability of Chinese occurring in all situations; it might turn out that in some other corpus or context Chinese is a very unlikely word. But it is the probability that makes it most likely that Chinese will occur 400 times in a million-word corpus. We present ways to modify the MLE estimates slightly to get better probability estimates in Section 3.6. Let’s move on to some examples from a real but tiny corpus, drawn from the now-defunct Berkeley Restaurant Project, a dialogue system from the last century that answered questions about a database of restaurants in Berkeley, California (Jurafsky et al., 1994). Here are some sample user queries (text-normalized, by lower casing and with punctuation striped) (a sample of 9332 sentences is on the website): can you tell me about any good cantonese restaurants close by tell me about chez panisse i’m looking for a good place to eat breakfast when is caffe venezia open during the day Figure 3.1 shows the bigram counts from part of a bigram grammar from textnormalized Berkeley Restaurant Project sentences. Note that the majority of the values are zero. In fact, we have chosen the sample words to cohere with each other; a matrix selected from a random set of eight words would be even more sparse. i want to eat chinese food lunch spend i 5 827 0 9 0 0 0 2 want 2 0 608 1 6 6 5 1 to 2 0 4 686 2 0 6 211 eat 0 0 2 0 16 2 42 0 chinese 1 0 0 0 0 82 1 0 food 15 0 15 0 1 4 0 0 lunch 2 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 spend 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 Figure 3.1 Bigram counts for eight of the words (out ofV = 1446) in the Berkeley Restaurant Project corpus of 9332 sentences. Zero counts are in gray. Each cell shows the count of the column label word following the row label word. Thus the cell in row i and column want means that want followed i 827 times in the corpus. Figure 3.2 shows the bigram probabilities after normalization (dividing each cell in Fig. 3.1 by the appropriate unigram for its row, taken from the following set of unigram counts): i want to eat chinese food lunch spend 2533 927 2417 746 158 1093 341 278 i want to eat chinese food lunch spend i 0.002 0.33 0 0.0036 0 0 0 0.00079 want 0.0022 0 0.66 0.0011 0.0065 0.0065 0.0054 0.0011 to 0.00083 0 0.0017 0.28 0.00083 0 0.0025 0.087 eat 0 0 0.0027 0 0.021 0.0027 0.056 0 chinese 0.0063 0 0 0 0 0.52 0.0063 0 food 0.014 0 0.014 0 0.00092 0.0037 0 0 lunch 0.0059 0 0 0 0 0.0029 0 0 spend 0.0036 0 0.0036 0 0 0 0 0 Figure 3.2 Bigram probabilities for eight words in the Berkeley Restaurant Project corpus of 9332 sentences. Zero probabilities are in gray. Here are a few other useful probabilities: P(i|<s>) = 0.25 P(english|want) = 0.0011 P(food|english) = 0.5 P(</s>|food) = 0.68 Now we can compute the probability of sentences like I want English food or I want Chinese food by simply multiplying the appropriate bigram probabilities together, as follows: P(<s> i want english food </s> ) = P(i|<s>)P(want|i)P(english|want) P(food|english)P(</s>|food) = 0.25× 0.33× 0.0011× 0.5× 0.68 = 0.000031 We leave it as Exercise 3.2 to compute the probability ofi want chinese food. What kinds of linguistic phenomena are captured in these bigram statistics? Some of the bigram probabilities above encode some facts that we think of as strictly syntactic in nature, like the fact that what comes after eat is usually a noun or an adjective, or that what comes after to is usually a verb. Others might be a fact about the personal assistant task, like the high probability of sentences beginning with the words I. And some might even be cultural rather than linguistic, like the higher probability that people are looking for Chinese versus English food. 3.1.3 Dealing with scale in large n-gram models In practice, language models can be very large, leading to practical issues. Log probabilities Language model probabilities are always stored and computed in log space as log probabilities. This is because probabilities are (by deﬁnition)log probabilities less than or equal to 1, and so the more probabilities we multiply together, the smaller the product becomes. Multiplying enough n-grams together would result in numerical underﬂow. Adding in log space is equivalent to multiplying in linear space, so we combine log probabilities by adding them. By adding log probabilities instead of multiplying probabilities, we get results that are not as small. We do all computation and storage in log space, and just convert back into probabilities if we need to report probabilities at the end by taking the exp of the logprob: p1× p2× p3× p4 = exp(log p1 + log p2 + log p3 + log p4) (3.13) In practice throughout this book, we’ll use log to mean natural log (ln) when the base is not speciﬁed. 3.2 • E VALUATING LANGUAGE MODELS : T RAINING AND TEST SETS 7 Longer context Although for pedagogical purposes we have only described bigram models, when there is sufﬁcient training data we use trigram models, whichtrigram condition on the previous two words, or4-gram or 5-gram models. For these larger4-gram 5-gram n-grams, we’ll need to assume extra contexts to the left and right of the sentence end. For example, to compute trigram probabilities at the very beginning of the sentence, we use two pseudo-words for the ﬁrst trigram (i.e., P(I|<s><s>). Some large n-gram datasets have been created, like the million most frequent n-grams drawn from the Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA), a curated 1 billion word corpus of American English (Davies, 2020), Google’s Web 5-gram corpus from 1 trillion words of English web text (Franz and Brants, 2006), or the Google Books Ngrams corpora (800 billion tokens from Chinese, English, French, German, Hebrew, Italian, Russian, and Spanish) (Lin et al., 2012)). It’s even possible to use extremely long-range n-gram context. The inﬁni-gram (∞-gram) project (Liu et al., 2024) allows n-grams of any length. Their idea is to avoid the expensive (in space and time) pre-computation of huge n-gram count tables. Instead, n-gram probabilities with arbitrary n are computed quickly at inference time by using an efﬁcient representation called sufﬁx arrays. This allows computing of n-grams of every length for enormous corpora of 5 trillion tokens. Efﬁciency considerations are important when building large n-gram language models. It is standard to quantize the probabilities using only 4-8 bits (instead of 8-byte ﬂoats), store the word strings on disk and represent them in memory only as a 64-bit hash, and represent n-grams in special data structures like ‘reverse tries’. It is also common to prune n-gram language models, for example by only keeping n-grams with counts greater than some threshold or using entropy to prune lessimportant n-grams (Stolcke, 1998). Efﬁcient language model toolkits like KenLM (Heaﬁeld 2011, Heaﬁeld et al. 2013) use sorted arrays and use merge sorts to efﬁciently build the probability tables in a minimal number of passes through a large corpus. 3.2 Evaluating Language Models: Training and Test Sets The best way to evaluate the performance of a language model is to embed it in an application and measure how much the application improves. Such end-to-end evaluation is called extrinsic evaluation. Extrinsic evaluation is the only way toextrinsic evaluation know if a particular improvement in the language model (or any component) is really going to help the task at hand. Thus for evaluating n-gram language models that are a component of some task like speech recognition or machine translation, we can compare the performance of two candidate language models by running the speech recognizer or machine translator twice, once with each language model, and seeing which gives the more accurate transcription. Unfortunately, running big NLP systems end-to-end is often very expensive. Instead, it’s helpful to have a metric that can be used to quickly evaluate potential improvements in a language model. An intrinsic evaluation metric is one that mea-intrinsic evaluation sures the quality of a model independent of any application. In the next section we’ll introduce perplexity, which is the standard intrinsic metric for measuring language model performance, both for simple n-gram language models and for the more sophisticated neural large language models of Chapter 8. In order to evaluate any machine learning model, we need to have at least three distinct datasets: the training set, the development set, and the test set.training set development set test set The training set is the data we use to learn the parameters of our model; for simple n-gram language models it’s the corpus from which we get the counts that we normalize into the probabilities of the n-gram language model. The test set is a different, held-out set of data, not overlapping with the training set, that we use to evaluate the model. We need a separate test set to give us an unbiased estimate of how well the model we trained can generalize when we apply it to some new unknown dataset. A machine learning model that perfectly captured the training data, but performed terribly on any other data, wouldn’t be much use when it comes time to apply it to any new data or problem! We thus measure the quality of an n-gram model by its performance on this unseen test set or test corpus. How should we choose a training and test set? The test set should reﬂect the language we want to use the model for. If we’re going to use our language model for speech recognition of chemistry lectures, the test set should be text of chemistry lectures. If we’re going to use it as part of a system for translating hotel booking requests from Chinese to English, the test set should be text of hotel booking requests. If we want our language model to be general purpose, then the test set should be drawn from a wide variety of texts. In such cases we might collect a lot of texts from different sources, and then divide it up into a training set and a test set. It’s important to do the dividing carefully; if we’re building a general purpose model, we don’t want the test set to consist of only text from one document, or one author, since that wouldn’t be a good measure of general performance. Thus if we are given a corpus of text and want to compare the performance of two different n-gram models, we divide the data into training and test sets, and train the parameters of both models on the training set. We can then compare how well the two trained models ﬁt the test set. But what does it mean to “ﬁt the test set”? The standard answer is simple: whichever language model assigns a higher probability to the test set—which means it more accurately predicts the test set—is a better model. Given two probabilistic models, the better model is the one that better predicts the details of the test data, and hence will assign a higher probability to the test data. Since our evaluation metric is based on test set probability, it’s important not to let the test sentences into the training set. Suppose we are trying to compute the probability of a particular “test” sentence. If our test sentence is part of the training corpus, we will mistakenly assign it an artiﬁcially high probability when it occurs in the test set. We call this situation training on the test set or also data contamination. Training on the test set introduces a bias that makes the probabilitiesdata contamination all look too high, and causes huge inaccuracies in perplexity, the probability-based metric we introduce below. Even if we don’t train on the test set, if we test our language model on the test set many times after making different changes, we might implicitly tune to its characteristics, by noticing which changes seem to make the model better. For this reason, we only want to run our model on the test set once, or a very few number of times, once we are sure our model is ready. For this reason we normally instead have a third dataset called a developmentdevelopment test test set or, devset. We do all our testing on this dataset until the very end, and then we test on the test set once to see how good our model is. How do we divide our data into training, development, and test sets? We want our test set to be as large as possible, since a small test set may be accidentally unrepresentative, but we also want as much training data as possible. At the minimum, we would want to pick the smallest test set that gives us enough statistical power 3.3 • E VALUATING LANGUAGE MODELS : P ERPLEXITY 9 to measure a statistically signiﬁcant difference between two potential models. It’s important that the devset be drawn from the same kind of text as the test set, since its goal is to measure how we would do on the test set. 3.3 Evaluating Language Models: Perplexity We said above that we evaluate language models based on which one assigns a higher probability to the test set. A better model is better at predicting upcoming words, and so it will be less surprised by (i.e., assign a higher probability to) each word when it occurs in the test set. Indeed, a perfect language model would correctly guess each next word in a corpus, assigning it a probability of 1, and all the other words a probability of zero. So given a test corpus, a better language model will assign a higher probability to it than a worse language model. But in fact, we often do not use raw probability as our metric for evaluating language models. The reason is that the probability of a test set (or any sequence) depends on the number of words or tokens in it; the probability of a test set gets smaller the longer the text. It’s useful to have a metric that is per-word, normalized by length, so we could compare across texts of different lengths. There is a such a metric! It’s a function of probability called perplexity, and it is used for evaluating large language models as well as n-gram models. The perplexity (sometimes abbreviated as PP or PPL) of a language model on aperplexity test set is the inverse probability of the test set (one over the probability of the test set), normalized by the number of words (or tokens). For this reason it’s sometimes called the per-word or per-token perplexity. We normalize by the number of words N by taking the Nth root. For a test set W = w1w2 . . .wN,: perplexity(W ) = P(w1w2 . . .wN)− 1 N (3.14) = N √ P(w1w2 . . .wN) Or we can use the chain rule to expand the probability of W: perplexity(W ) = N √ N∏ i=1 P(wi|w1 . . .wi−1) (3.15) Note that because of the inverse in Eq. 3.15, the higher the probability of the word sequence, the lower the perplexity. Thus thethe lower the perplexity of a model on the data, the better the model. Minimizing perplexity is equivalent to maximizing the test set probability according to the language model. Why does perplexity use the inverse probability? It turns out the inverse arises from the original deﬁnition of perplexity from cross-entropy rate in information theory; for those interested, the explanation is in the advanced Section 3.7. Meanwhile, we just have to remember that perplexity has an inverse relationship with probability. The details of computing the perplexity of a test set W depends on which language model we use. Here’s the perplexity of W with a unigram language model (just the geometric mean of the inverse of the unigram probabilities): perplexity(W ) = N √ N∏ i=1 P(wi) (3.16) The perplexity of W computed with a bigram language model is still a geometric mean, but now of the inverse of the bigram probabilities: perplexity(W ) = N √ N∏ i=1 P(wi|wi−1) (3.17) What we generally use for word sequence in Eq. 3.15 or Eq. 3.17 is the entire sequence of words in some test set. Since this sequence will cross many sentence boundaries, if our vocabulary includes a between-sentence token <EOS> or separate beginand end-sentence markers <s> and </s> then we can include them in the probability computation. If we do, then we also include one token per sentence in the total count of word tokens N.2 We mentioned above that perplexity is a function of both the text and the language model: given a text W, different language models will have different perplexities. Because of this, perplexity can be used to compare different language models. For example, here we trained unigram, bigram, and trigram models on 38 million words from the Wall Street Journalnewspaper. We then computed the perplexity of each of these models on a WSJ test set using Eq. 3.16 for unigrams, Eq. 3.17 for bigrams, and the corresponding equation for trigrams. The table below shows the perplexity of the 1.5 million word test set according to each of the language models. Unigram Bigram Trigram Perplexity 962 170 109 As we see above, the more information the n-gram gives us about the word sequence, the higher the probability the n-gram will assign to the string. A trigram model is less surprised than a unigram model because it has a better idea of what words might come next, and so it assigns them a higher probability. And the higher the probability, the lower the perplexity (since as Eq. 3.15 showed, perplexity is related inversely to the probability of the test sequence according to the model). So a lower perplexity tells us that a language model is a better predictor of the test set. Note that in computing perplexities, the language model must be constructed without any knowledge of the test set, or else the perplexity will be artiﬁcially low. And the perplexity of two language models is only comparable if they use identical vocabularies. An (intrinsic) improvement in perplexity does not guarantee an (extrinsic) improvement in the performance of a language processing task like speech recognition or machine translation. Nonetheless, because perplexity usually correlates with task improvements, it is commonly used as a convenient evaluation metric. Still, when possible a model’s improvement in perplexity should be conﬁrmed by an end-to-end evaluation on a real task. 3.3.1 Perplexity as Weighted Average Branching Factor It turns out that perplexity can also be thought of as the weighted average branching factor of a language. The branching factor of a language is the number of possible next words that can follow any word. For example consider a mini artiﬁcial 2 For example if we use both begin and end tokens, we would include the end-of-sentence marker</s> but not the beginning-of-sentence marker<s> in our count ofN; This is because the end-sentence token is followed directly by the begin-sentence token with probability almost 1, so we don’t want the probability of that fake transition to inﬂuence our perplexity. 3.4 • S AMPLING SENTENCES FROM A LANGUAGE MODEL 11 language that is deterministic (no probabilities), any word can follow any word, and whose vocabulary consists of only three colors: L ={red, blue, green} (3.18) The branching factor of this language is 3. Now let’s make a probabilistic version of the same LM, let’s call itA, where each word follows each other with equal probability1 3 (it was trained on a training set with equal counts for the 3 colors), and a test set T = “red red red red blue ”. Let’s ﬁrst convince ourselves that if we compute the perplexity of this artiﬁcial color language on this test set (or any such test set) we indeed get 3. By Eq. 3.15, the perplexity of A on T is: perplexityA(T ) = PA(red red red red blue )− 1 = ((1 )5)− 1 = (1 )−1 = 3 (3.19) But now suppose red was very likely in the training set of a different LM B, and so B has the following probabilities: P(red) = 0.8 P(green) = 0.1 P(blue) = 0.1 (3.20) We should expect the perplexity of the same test set red red red red blue for language model B to be lower since most of the time the next color will be red, which is very predictable, i.e. has a high probability. So the probability of the test set will be higher, and since perplexity is inversely related to probability, the perplexity will be lower. Thus, although the branching factor is still 3, the perplexity or weighted branching factor is smaller: perplexityB(T ) = PB(red red red red blue )−1/5 = 0.04096− 1 = 0.527−1 = 1.89 (3.21) 3.4 Sampling sentences from a language model One important way to visualize what kind of knowledge a language model embodies is to sample from it. Sampling from a distribution means to choose random pointssampling according to their likelihood. Thus sampling from a language model—which represents a distribution over sentences—means to generate some sentences, choosing each sentence according to its likelihood as deﬁned by the model. Thus we are more likely to generate sentences that the model thinks have a high probability and less likely to generate sentences that the model thinks have a low probability. This technique of visualizing a language model by sampling was ﬁrst suggested very early on by Shannon (1948) and Miller and Selfridge (1950). It’s simplest to visualize how this works for the unigram case. Imagine all the words of the English language covering the number line between 0 and 1, each word covering an interval 0 1 0.06 the .06 0.03 of 0.02 a 0.02 toin .09.11.13.15 … however (p=0.0003) polyphonic p=0.0000018 …0.02 .66 .99 … Figure 3.3 A visualization of the sampling distribution for sampling sentences by repeatedly sampling unigrams. The blue bar represents the relative frequency of each word (we’ve ordered them from most frequent to least frequent, but the choice of order is arbitrary). The number line shows the cumulative probabilities. If we choose a random number between 0 and 1, it will fall in an interval corresponding to some word. The expectation for the random number to fall in the larger intervals of one of the frequent words ( the, of, a) is much higher than in the smaller interval of one of the rare words (polyphonic). proportional to its frequency. Fig. 3.3 shows a visualization, using a unigram LM computed from the text of this book. We choose a random value between 0 and 1, ﬁnd that point on the probability line, and print the word whose interval includes this chosen value. We continue choosing random numbers and generating words until we randomly generate the sentence-ﬁnal token </s>. We can use the same technique to generate bigrams by ﬁrst generating a random bigram that starts with <s> (according to its bigram probability). Let’s say the second word of that bigram is w. We next choose a random bigram starting with w (again, drawn according to its bigram probability), and so on. 3.5 Generalizing vs. overﬁtting the training set The n-gram model, like many statistical models, is dependent on the training corpus. One implication of this is that the probabilities often encode speciﬁc facts about a given training corpus. Another implication is that n-grams do a better and better job of modeling the training corpus as we increase the value of n. We can use the sampling method from the prior section to visualize both of these facts! To give an intuition for the increasing power of higher-order n-grams, Fig. 3.4 shows random sentences generated from unigram, bigram, trigram, and 4gram models trained on Shakespeare’s works. The longer the context, the more coherent the sentences. The unigram sentences show no coherent relation between words nor any sentence-ﬁnal punctuation. The bigram sentences have some local word-to-word coherence (especially considering punctuation as words). The trigram sentences are beginning to look a lot like Shakespeare. Indeed, the 4-gram sentences look a little too much like Shakespeare. The words It cannot be but so are directly from King John. This is because, not to put the knock on Shakespeare, his oeuvre is not very large as corpora go (N = 884,647,V = 29,066), and our n-gram probability matrices are ridiculously sparse. There are V 2 = 844,000,000 possible bigrams alone, and the number of possible 4-grams is V 4 = 7× 1017. Thus, once the generator has chosen the ﬁrst 3-gram (It cannot be), there are only seven possible next words for the 4th element (but, I, that, thus, this, and the period). To get an idea of the dependence on the training set, let’s look at LMs trained on a completely different corpus: the Wall Street Journal(WSJ) newspaper. Shakespeare 3.5 • G ENERALIZING VS . OVERFITTING THE TRAINING SET 13 –To him swallowed confess hear both. Which. Of save on trail for are ay device and rote life have gram –Hill he late speaks; or! a more to leg less ﬁrst you enter –Why dost stand forth thy canopy, forsooth; he is this palpable hit the King Henry. Live king. Follow. gram –What means, sir. I confess she? then all sorts, he is trim, captain. –Fly, and will rid me these news of price. Therefore the sadness of parting, as they say, ’tis done. gram –This shall forbid it should be branded, if renown made it empty. –King Henry. What! I will go seek the traitor Gloucester. Exeunt some of the watch. A great banquet serv’d in; gram –It cannot be but so. Figure 3.4 Eight sentences randomly generated from four n-gram models computed from Shakespeare’s works. All characters were mapped to lower-case and punctuation marks were treated as words. Output is hand-corrected for capitalization to improve readability. and the WSJ are both English, so we might have expected some overlap between our n-grams for the two genres. Fig. 3.5 shows sentences generated by unigram, bigram, and trigram models trained on 40 million words from WSJ. Months the my and issue of year foreign new exchange’s september were recession exchange new endorsed a acquire to six executivesgram Last December through the way to preserve the Hudson corporation N. B. E. C. Taylor would seem to complete the major central planners one gram point ﬁve percent of U. S. E. has already old M. X. corporation of living on information such as more frequently ﬁshing to keep her They also point to ninety nine point six billion dollars from two hundred four oh six three percent of the rates of interest stores as Mexico and gram Brazil on market conditions Figure 3.5 Three sentences randomly generated from three n-gram models computed from 40 million words of the Wall Street Journal, lower-casing all characters and treating punctuation as words. Output was then hand-corrected for capitalization to improve readability. Compare these examples to the pseudo-Shakespeare in Fig. 3.4. While they both model “English-like sentences”, there is no overlap in the generated sentences, and little overlap even in small phrases. Statistical models are pretty useless as predictors if the training sets and the test sets are as different as Shakespeare and the WSJ. How should we deal with this problem when we build n-gram models? One step is to be sure to use a training corpus that has a similargenre to whatever task we are trying to accomplish. To build a language model for translating legal documents, we need a training corpus of legal documents. To build a language model for a question-answering system, we need a training corpus of questions. It is equally important to get training data in the appropriate dialect or variety, especially when processing social media posts or spoken transcripts. For example some tweets will use features of African American English (AAE)— the name for the many variations of language used in African American communities (King, 2020). Such features can include words like ﬁnna—an auxiliary verb that marks immediate future tense —that don’t occur in other varieties, or spellings like den for then, in tweets like this one (Blodgett and O’Connor, 2017): (3.22) Bored af den my phone ﬁnna die!!! while tweets from English-based languages like Nigerian Pidgin have markedly different vocabulary and n-gram patterns from American English (Jurgens et al., 2017): (3.23) @username R u a wizard or wat gan sef: in d mornin u tweet, afternoon u tweet, nyt gan u dey tweet. beta get ur IT placement wiv twitter Is it possible for the testset nonetheless to have a word we have never seen before? What happens if the wordJurafsky never occurs in our training set, but pops up in the test set? The answer is that although words might be unseen, we normally run our NLP algorithms not on words but on subword tokens. With subword tokenization (like the BPE algorithm of Chapter 2) any word can be modeled as a sequence of known smaller subwords, if necessary by a sequence of tokens corresponding to individual letters. So although for convenience we’ve been referring to words in this chapter, the language model vocabulary is normally the set of tokens rather than words, and in this way the test set can never contain unseen tokens. 3.6 Smoothing, Interpolation, and Backoff There is a problem with using maximum likelihood estimates for probabilities: any ﬁnite training corpus will be missing some perfectly acceptable English word sequences. That is, cases where a particular n-gram never occurs in the training data but appears in the test set. Perhaps our training corpus has the words ruby and slippers in it but just happens not to have the phrase ruby slippers . These unseen sequences or zeros—sequences that don’t occur in the training setzeros but do occur in the test set—are a problem for two reasons. First, their presence means we are underestimating the probability of word sequences that might occur, which hurts the performance of any application we want to run on this data. Second, if the probability of any word in the test set is 0, the probability of the whole test set is 0. Perplexity is deﬁned based on the inverse probability of the test set. Thus if some words in context have zero probability, we can’t compute perplexity at all, since we can’t divide by zero! The standard way to deal with putative “zero probability n-grams” that should really have some non-zero probability is calledsmoothing or discounting. Smoothingsmoothing discounting algorithms shave off a bit of probability mass from some more frequent events and give it to unseen events. Here we’ll introduce some simple smoothing algorithms: Laplace (add-one) smoothing, stupid backoff, and n-gram interpolation. 3.6.1 Laplace Smoothing The simplest way to do smoothing is to add one to all the n-gram counts, before we normalize them into probabilities. All the counts that used to be zero will now have a count of 1, the counts of 1 will be 2, and so on. This algorithm is called Laplace smoothing. Laplace smoothing does not perform well enough to be usedLaplace smoothing in modern n-gram models, but it usefully introduces many of the concepts that we see in other smoothing algorithms, gives a useful baseline, and is also a practical smoothing algorithm for other tasks like text classiﬁcation (Appendix K). Let’s start with the application of Laplace smoothing to unigram probabilities. Recall that the unsmoothed maximum likelihood estimate of the unigram probability 3.6 • S MOOTHING , INTERPOLATION , AND BACKOFF 15 of the word wi is its count ci normalized by the total number of word tokens N: P(wi) = ci N Laplace smoothing merely adds one to each count (hence its alternate name addone smoothing). Since there are V words in the vocabulary and each one was in-add-one cremented, we also need to adjust the denominator to take into account the extra V observations. (What happens to our P values if we don’t increase the denominator?) PLaplace(wi) = ci + 1 N +V (3.24) Now that we have the intuition for the unigram case, let’s smooth our Berkeley Restaurant Project bigrams. Figure 3.6 shows the add-one smoothed counts for the bigrams in Fig. 3.1. i want to eat chinese food lunch spend i 6 828 1 10 1 1 1 3 want 3 1 609 2 7 7 6 2 to 3 1 5 687 3 1 7 212 eat 1 1 3 1 17 3 43 1 chinese 2 1 1 1 1 83 2 1 food 16 1 16 1 2 5 1 1 lunch 3 1 1 1 1 2 1 1 spend 2 1 2 1 1 1 1 1 Figure 3.6 Add-one smoothed bigram counts for eight of the words (out of V = 1446) in the Berkeley Restaurant Project corpus of 9332 sentences. Previously-zero counts are in gray. Figure 3.7 shows the add-one smoothed probabilities for the bigrams in Fig. 3.2, computed by Eq. 3.26 below. Recall that normal bigram probabilities are computed by normalizing each row of counts by the unigram count: PMLE(wn|wn−1) = C(wn−1wn) C(wn−1) (3.25) For add-one smoothed bigram counts, we need to augment the unigram count in the denominator by the number of total word types in the vocabulary V . We can see why this is in the following equation, which makes it explicit that the unigram count in the denominator is really the sum over all the bigrams that start with wn−1. Since we add one to each of these, and there are V of them, we add a total of V to the denominator: PLaplace(wn|wn−1) = C(wn−1wn) +1∑ w (C(wn−1w) +1) = C(wn−1wn) +1 C(wn−1) +V (3.26) Thus, each of the unigram counts given on page 5 will need to be augmented byV = 1446. The result, using Eq. 3.26, is the smoothed bigram probabilities in Fig. 3.7. One useful visualization technique is to reconstruct an adjusted count matrix so we can see how much a smoothing algorithm has changed the original counts. This adjusted count C∗ is the count that, if divided by C(wn−1), would result in the smoothed probability. This adjusted count is easier to compare directly with the MLE counts. That is, the Laplace probability can equally be expressed as the adjusted count divided by the (non-smoothed) denominator from Eq. 3.25: PLaplace(wn|wn−1) = C(wn−1wn) +1 C(wn−1) +V = C∗(wn−1wn) C(wn−1) i want to eat chinese food lunch spend i 0.0015 0.21 0.00025 0.0025 0.00025 0.00025 0.00025 0.00075 want 0.0013 0.00042 0.26 0.00084 0.0029 0.0029 0.0025 0.00084 to 0.00078 0.00026 0.0013 0.18 0.00078 0.00026 0.0018 0.055 eat 0.00046 0.00046 0.0014 0.00046 0.0078 0.0014 0.02 0.00046 chinese 0.0012 0.00062 0.00062 0.00062 0.00062 0.052 0.0012 0.00062 food 0.0063 0.00039 0.0063 0.00039 0.00079 0.002 0.00039 0.00039 lunch 0.0017 0.00056 0.00056 0.00056 0.00056 0.0011 0.00056 0.00056 spend 0.0012 0.00058 0.0012 0.00058 0.00058 0.00058 0.00058 0.00058 Figure 3.7 Add-one smoothed bigram probabilities for eight of the words (out of V = 1446) in the BeRP corpus of 9332 sentences computed by Eq. 3.26. Previously-zero probabilities are in gray. Rearranging terms, we can solve for C∗(wn−1wn) : C∗(wn−1wn) = [C(wn−1wn) +1]×C(wn−1) C(wn−1) +V (3.27) Figure 3.8 shows the reconstructed counts, computed by Eq. 3.27. i want to eat chinese food lunch spend i 3.8 527 0.64 6.4 0.64 0.64 0.64 1.9 want 1.2 0.39 238 0.78 2.7 2.7 2.3 0.78 to 1.9 0.63 3.1 430 1.9 0.63 4.4 133 eat 0.34 0.34 1 0.34 5.8 1 15 0.34 chinese 0.2 0.098 0.098 0.098 0.098 8.2 0.2 0.098 food 6.9 0.43 6.9 0.43 0.86 2.2 0.43 0.43 lunch 0.57 0.19 0.19 0.19 0.19 0.38 0.19 0.19 spend 0.32 0.16 0.32 0.16 0.16 0.16 0.16 0.16 Figure 3.8 Add-one reconstituted counts for eight words (ofV = 1446) in the BeRP corpus of 9332 sentences, computed by Eq. 3.27. Previously-zero counts are in gray. Note that add-one smoothing has made a very big change to the counts. Comparing Fig. 3.8 to the original counts in Fig. 3.1, we can see thatC(want to) changed from 608 to 238. We can see this in probability space as well: P(to|want) decreases from 0.66 in the unsmoothed case to 0.26 in the smoothed case. Looking at the discount d, deﬁned as the ratio between new and old counts, shows us how strikingly the counts for each preﬁx word have been reduced; the discount for the bigramwant to is 0.39, while the discount for Chinese food is 0.10, a factor of 10. The sharp change occurs because too much probability mass is moved to all the zeros. 3.6.2 Add-k smoothing One alternative to add-one smoothing is to move a bit less of the probability mass from the seen to the unseen events. Instead of adding 1 to each count, we add a fractional count k (0.5? 0.01?). This algorithm is therefore called add-k smoothing.add-k P∗ Add-k(wn|wn−1) = C(wn−1wn) +k C(wn−1) +kV (3.28) Add-k smoothing requires that we have a method for choosing k; this can be done, for example, by optimizing on a devset. Although add-k is useful for some tasks (including text classiﬁcation), it turns out that it still doesn’t work well for 3.6 • S MOOTHING , INTERPOLATION , AND BACKOFF 17 language modeling, generating counts with poor variances and often inappropriate discounts (Gale and Church, 1994). 3.6.3 Language Model Interpolation There is an alternative source of knowledge we can draw on to solve the problem of zero frequency n-grams. If we are trying to compute P(wn|wn−2wn−1) but we have no examples of a particular trigram wn−2wn−1wn, we can instead estimate its probability by using the bigram probability P(wn|wn−1). Similarly, if we don’t have counts to compute P(wn|wn−1), we can look to the unigram P(wn). In other words, sometimes using less context can help us generalize more for contexts that the model hasn’t learned much about. The most common way to use this n-gram hierarchy is called interpolation:interpolation computing a new probability by interpolating (weighting and combining) the trigram, bigram, and unigram probabilities. In simple linear interpolation, we combine different order n-grams by linearly interpolating them. Thus, we estimate the trigram probability P(wn|wn−2wn−1) by mixing together the unigram, bigram, and trigram probabilities, each weighted by a λ: ˆP(wn|wn−2wn−1) = λ1P(wn) +λ2P(wn|wn−1) +λ3P(wn|wn−2wn−1) (3.29) The λs must sum to 1, making Eq. 3.29 equivalent to a weighted average. In a slightly more sophisticated version of linear interpolation, each λ weight is computed by conditioning on the context. This way, if we have particularly accurate counts for a particular bigram, we assume that the counts of the trigrams based on this bigram will be more trustworthy, so we can make the λs for those trigrams higher and thus give that trigram more weight in the interpolation. Equation 3.30 shows the equation for interpolation with context-conditioned weights, where each lambda takes an argument that is the two prior word context: ˆP(wn|wn−2wn−1) = λ1(wn−2:n−1)P(wn) +λ2(wn−2:n−1)P(wn|wn−1) + λ3(wn−2:n−1)P(wn|wn−2wn−1) (3.30) How are these λ values set? Both the simple interpolation and conditional interpolation λs are learned from a held-out corpus. A held-out corpus is an additionalheld-out training corpus, so-called because we hold it out from the training data, that we use to set these λ values.3 We do so by choosing the λ values that maximize the likelihood of the held-out corpus. That is, we ﬁx the n-gram probabilities and then search for the λ values that—when plugged into Eq. 3.29—give us the highest probability of the held-out set. There are various ways to ﬁnd this optimal set of λs. One way is to use the EM algorithm, an iterative learning algorithm that converges on locally optimal λs (Jelinek and Mercer, 1980). 3.6.4 Stupid Backoff An alternative to interpolation isbackoff. In a backoff model, if the n-gram we needbackoff 3 Held-out corpora are generally used to set hyperparameters, which are special parameters, unlike regular counts that are learned from the training data; we’ll discuss hyperparameters in Chapter 6. has zero counts, we approximate it by backing off to the (n-1)-gram. We continue backing off until we reach a history that has some counts. For a backoff model to give a correct probability distribution, we have todiscount the higher-order n-gramsdiscount to save some probability mass for the lower order n-grams. In practice, instead of discounting, it’s common to use a much simpler non-discounted backoff algorithm called stupid backoff (Brants et al., 2007).stupid backoff Stupid backoff gives up the idea of trying to make the language model a true probability distribution. There is no discounting of the higher-order probabilities. If a higher-order n-gram has a zero count, we simply backoff to a lower order n-gram, weighed by a ﬁxed (context-independent) weight. This algorithm does not produce a probability distribution, so we’ll follow Brants et al. (2007) in referring to it asS: S(wi|wi−N+1: i−1) =    count ( w i− N + 1: i ) count ( w i− N + 1: i− 1 ) if count(wi−N+1: i) > 0 λS(wi|wi−N+2: i−1) otherwise (3.31) The backoff terminates in the unigram, which has scoreS(w) = count(w) N . Brants et al. (2007) ﬁnd that a value of 0.4 worked well for λ. 3.7 Advanced: Perplexity’s Relation to Entropy We introduced perplexity in Section 3.3 as a way to evaluate n-gram models on a test set. A better n-gram model is one that assigns a higher probability to the test data, and perplexity is a normalized version of the probability of the test set. The perplexity measure actually arises from the information-theoretic concept of cross-entropy, which explains otherwise mysterious properties of perplexity (why the inverse probability, for example?) and its relationship to entropy. Entropy is aEntropy measure of information. Given a random variable X ranging over whatever we are predicting (words, letters, parts of speech), the set of which we’ll call χ, and with a particular probability function, call it p(x), the entropy of the random variable X is: H(X) =− ∑ x∈χ p(x)log2 p(x) (3.32) The log can, in principle, be computed in any base. If we use log base 2, the resulting value of entropy will be measured in bits. One intuitive way to think about entropy is as a lower bound on the number of bits it would take to encode a certain decision or piece of information in the optimal coding scheme. Consider an example from the standard information theory textbook Cover and Thomas (1991). Imagine that we want to place a bet on a horse race but it is too far to go all the way to Yonkers Racetrack, so we’d like to send a short message to the bookie to tell him which of the eight horses to bet on. One way to encode this message is just to use the binary representation of the horse’s number as the code; thus, horse 1 would be 001, horse 2 010, horse 3 011, and so on, with horse 8 coded as 000. If we spend the whole day betting and each horse is coded with 3 bits, on average we would be sending 3 bits per race. Can we do better? Suppose that the spread is the actual distribution of the bets placed and that we represent it as the prior probability of each horse as follows: 3.7 • A DVANCED : P ERPLEXITY ’S RELATION TO ENTROPY 19 Horse 1 1 2 Horse 5 1 Horse 2 1 4 Horse 6 1 Horse 3 1 8 Horse 7 1 Horse 4 1 16 Horse 8 1 The entropy of the random variable X that ranges over horses gives us a lower bound on the number of bits and is H(X) = − i=8∑ i=1 p(i)log2 p(i) = − 1 2 log2 2− 1 4 log2 4− 1 8 log2 8− 1 16 log2 16−4( 1 64 log2 64 ) = 2 bits (3.33) A code that averages 2 bits per race can be built with short encodings for more probable horses, and longer encodings for less probable horses. For example, we could encode the most likely horse with the code 0, and the remaining horses as 10, then 110, 1110, 111100, 111101, 111110, and 111111. What if the horses are equally likely? We saw above that if we used an equallength binary code for the horse numbers, each horse took 3 bits to code, so the average was 3. Is the entropy the same? In this case each horse would have a probability of 1 8. The entropy of the choice of horses is then H(X) =− i=8∑ i=1 8 log2 8 =−log2 8 = 3 bits (3.34) Until now we have been computing the entropy of a single variable. But most of what we will use entropy for involves sequences. For a grammar, for example, we will be computing the entropy of some sequence of words W ={w1,w2, . . . ,wn}. One way to do this is to have a variable that ranges over sequences of words. For example we can compute the entropy of a random variable that ranges over all sequences of words of length n in some language L as follows: H(w1,w2, . . . ,wn) =− ∑ w1: n∈L p(w1: n)log p(w1: n) (3.35) We could deﬁne the entropy rate (we could also think of this as the per-wordentropy rate entropy) as the entropy of this sequence divided by the number of words: nH(w1: n) =−1 n ∑ w1: n∈L p(w1: n)log p(w1: n) (3.36) But to measure the true entropy of a language, we need to consider sequences of inﬁnite length. If we think of a language as a stochastic process L that produces a sequence of words, and allowW to represent the sequence of words w1, . . . ,wn, then L’s entropy rateH(L) is deﬁned as H(L) = lim n→∞ nH(w1: n) = − lim n→∞ n ∑ W∈L p(w1: n)log p(w1: n) (3.37) The Shannon-McMillan-Breiman theorem (Algoet and Cover 1988, Cover and Thomas 1991) states that if the language is regular in certain ways (to be exact, if it is both stationary and ergodic), H(L) = lim n→∞ −1 n log p(w1: n) (3.38) That is, we can take a single sequence that is long enough instead of summing over all possible sequences. The intuition of the Shannon-McMillan-Breiman theorem is that a long-enough sequence of words will contain in it many other shorter sequences and that each of these shorter sequences will reoccur in the longer sequence according to their probabilities. A stochastic process is said to be stationary if the probabilities it assigns to aStationary sequence are invariant with respect to shifts in the time index. In other words, the probability distribution for words at timet is the same as the probability distribution at time t + 1. Markov models, and hence n-grams, are stationary. For example, in a bigram, Pi is dependent only on Pi−1. So if we shift our time index by x, Pi+x is still dependent on Pi+x−1. But natural language is not stationary, since as we show in Appendix D, the probability of upcoming words can be dependent on events that were arbitrarily distant and time dependent. Thus, our statistical models only give an approximation to the correct distributions and entropies of natural language. To summarize, by making some incorrect but convenient simplifying assumptions, we can compute the entropy of some stochastic process by taking a very long sample of the output and computing its average log probability. Now we are ready to introducecross-entropy. The cross-entropy is useful whencross-entropy we don’t know the actual probability distribution p that generated some data. It allows us to use some m, which is a model of p (i.e., an approximation to p). The cross-entropy of m on p is deﬁned by H(p,m) = lim n→∞ −1 n ∑ W∈L p(w1, . . . ,wn)logm(w1, . . . ,wn) (3.39) That is, we draw sequences according to the probability distribution p, but sum the log of their probabilities according to m. Again, following the Shannon-McMillan-Breiman theorem, for a stationary ergodic process: H(p,m) = lim n→∞ −1 n logm(w1w2 . . .wn) (3.40) This means that, as for entropy, we can estimate the cross-entropy of a model m on some distribution p by taking a single sequence that is long enough instead of summing over all possible sequences. What makes the cross-entropy useful is that the cross-entropy H(p,m) is an upper bound on the entropy H(p). For any model m: H(p)≤ H(p,m) (3.41) This means that we can use some simpliﬁed model m to help estimate the true entropy of a sequence of symbols drawn according to probabilityp. The more accurate m is, the closer the cross-entropy H(p,m) will be to the true entropy H(p). Thus, the difference between H(p,m) and H(p) is a measure of how accurate a model is. Between two models m1 and m2, the more accurate model will be the one with the 3.8 • S UMMARY 21 lower cross-entropy. (The cross-entropy can never be lower than the true entropy, so a model cannot err by underestimating the true entropy.) We are ﬁnally ready to see the relation between perplexity and cross-entropy as we saw it in Eq. 3.40. Cross-entropy is deﬁned in the limit as the length of the observed word sequence goes to inﬁnity. We approximate this cross-entropy by relying on a (sufﬁciently long) sequence of ﬁxed length. This approximation to the cross-entropy of a model M = P(wi|wi−N+1: i−1) on a sequence of words W is H(W ) =− 1 N logP(w1w2 . . .wN) (3.42) The perplexity of a model P on a sequence of words W is now formally deﬁned asperplexity 2 raised to the power of this cross-entropy: Perplexity(W ) = 2H(W ) = P(w1w2 . . .wN)− 1 N = N √ P(w1w2 . . .wN) 3.8 Summary This chapter introduced language modeling via the n-gram model, a classic model that allows us to introduce many of the basic concepts in language modeling. • Language models offer a way to assign a probability to a sentence or other sequence of words or tokens, and to predict a word or token from preceding words or tokens. • N-grams are perhaps the simplest kind of language model. They are Markov models that estimate words from a ﬁxed window of previous words. N-gram models can be trained by counting in a training corpus and normalizing the counts (the maximum likelihood estimate). • N-gram language models can be evaluated on a test set using perplexity. • The perplexity of a test set according to a language model is a function of the probability of the test set: the inverse test set probability according to the model, normalized by the length. • Sampling from a language model means to generate some sentences, choosing each sentence according to its likelihood as deﬁned by the model. • Smoothing algorithms provide a way to estimate probabilities for events that were unseen in training. Commonly used smoothing algorithms for n-grams include add-1 smoothing, or rely on lower-order n-gram counts throughinterpolation. Historical Notes The underlying mathematics of the n-gram was ﬁrst proposed by Markov (1913), who used what are now called Markov chains (bigrams and trigrams) to predict whether an upcoming letter in Pushkin’sEugene Onegin would be a vowel or a consonant. Markov classiﬁed 20,000 letters as V or C and computed the bigram and trigram probability that a given letter would be a vowel given the previous one or two letters. Shannon (1948) applied n-grams to compute approximations to English word sequences. Based on Shannon’s work, Markov models were commonly used in engineering, linguistic, and psychological work on modeling word sequences by the 1950s. In a series of extremely inﬂuential papers starting with Chomsky (1956) and including Chomsky (1957) and Miller and Chomsky (1963), Noam Chomsky argued that “ﬁnite-state Markov processes”, while a possibly useful engineering heuristic, were incapable of being a complete cognitive model of human grammatical knowledge. These arguments led many linguists and computational linguists to ignore work in statistical modeling for decades. The resurgence of n-gram language models came from Fred Jelinek and colleagues at the IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center, who were inﬂuenced by Shannon, and James Baker at CMU, who was inﬂuenced by the prior, classiﬁed work of Leonard Baum and colleagues on these topics at labs like the US Institute for Defense Analyses (IDA) after they were declassiﬁed. Independently these two labs successfully used n-grams in their speech recognition systems at the same time (Baker 1975b, Jelinek et al. 1975, Baker 1975a, Bahl et al. 1983, Jelinek 1990). The terms “language model” and “perplexity” were ﬁrst used for this technology by the IBM group. Jelinek and his colleagues used the term language model in a pretty modern way, to mean the entire set of linguistic inﬂuences on word sequence probabilities, including grammar, semantics, discourse, and even speaker characteristics, rather than just the particular n-gram model itself. Add-one smoothing derives from Laplace’s 1812 law of succession and was ﬁrst applied as an engineering solution to the zero frequency problem by Jeffreys (1948) based on an earlier Add-K suggestion by Johnson (1932). Problems with the addone algorithm are summarized in Gale and Church (1994). A wide variety of different language modeling and smoothing techniques were proposed in the 80s and 90s, including Good-Turing discounting—ﬁrst applied to the n-gram smoothing at IBM by Katz (N´adas 1984, Church and Gale 1991)— WittenBell discounting (Witten and Bell, 1991), and varieties ofclass-based n-gram mod-class-based n-gram els that used information about word classes. Starting in the late 1990s, Chen and Goodman performed a number of carefully controlled experiments comparing different algorithms and parameters (Chen and Goodman 1999, Goodman 2006, inter alia). They showed the advantages of Modiﬁed Interpolated Kneser-Ney , which became the standard baseline for n-gram language modeling around the turn of the century, especially because they showed that caches and class-based models provided only minor additional improvement. SRILM (Stolcke, 2002) and KenLM (Heaﬁeld 2011, Heaﬁeld et al. 2013) are publicly available toolkits for building ngram language models. Large language models are based on neural networks rather than n-grams, enabling them to solve the two major problems with n-grams: (1) the number of parameters increases exponentially as the n-gram order increases, and (2) n-grams have no way to generalize from training examples to test set examples unless they use identical words. Neural language models instead project words into a continuous space in which words with similar contexts have similar representations. We’ll introduce transformer-based large language models in Chapter 8, along the way introducing feedforward language models (Bengio et al. 2006, Schwenk 2007) in Chapter 6 and recurrent language models (Mikolov, 2012) in Chapter 13. EXERCISES 23 Exercises 3.1 Write out the equation for trigram probability estimation (modifying Eq. 3.11). Now write out all the non-zero trigram probabilities for the I am Sam corpus on page 4. 3.2 Calculate the probability of the sentence i want chinese food . Give two probabilities, one using Fig. 3.2 and the ‘useful probabilities’ just below it on page 6, and another using the add-1 smoothed table in Fig. 3.7. Assume the additional add-1 smoothed probabilitiesP(i|<s>) = 0.19 and P(</s>|food) = 0.40. 3.3 Which of the two probabilities you computed in the previous exercise is higher, unsmoothed or smoothed? Explain why. 3.4 We are given the following corpus, modiﬁed from the one in the chapter: <s> I am Sam </s> <s> Sam I am </s> <s> I am Sam </s> <s> I do not like green eggs and Sam </s> Using a bigram language model with add-one smoothing, what is P(Sam | am)? Include <s> and </s> in your counts just like any other token. 3.5 Suppose we didn’t use the end-symbol </s>. Train an unsmoothed bigram grammar on the following training corpus without using the end-symbol</s>: <s> a b <s> b b <s> b a <s> a a Demonstrate that your bigram model does not assign a single probability distribution across all sentence lengths by showing that the sum of the probability of the four possible 2 word sentences over the alphabet {a,b} is 1.0, and the sum of the probability of all possible 3 word sentences over the alphabet{a,b} is also 1.0. 3.6 Suppose we train a trigram language model with add-one smoothing on a given corpus. The corpus contains V word types. Express a formula for estimating P(w3|w1,w2), where w3 is a word which follows the bigram (w1,w2), in terms of various n-gram counts and V . Use the notation c(w1,w2,w3) to denote the number of times that trigram (w1,w2,w3) occurs in the corpus, and so on for bigrams and unigrams. 3.7 We are given the following corpus, modiﬁed from the one in the chapter: <s> I am Sam </s> <s> Sam I am </s> <s> I am Sam </s> <s> I do not like green eggs and Sam </s> If we use linear interpolation smoothing between a maximum-likelihood bigram model and a maximum-likelihood unigram model withλ1 = 1 2 and λ2 = 2, what is P(Sam|am)? Include <s> and </s> in your counts just like any other token. 3.8 Write a program to compute unsmoothed unigrams and bigrams. 3.9 Run your n-gram program on two different small corpora of your choice (you might use email text or newsgroups). Now compare the statistics of the two corpora. What are the differences in the most common unigrams between the two? How about interesting differences in bigrams? 3.10 Add an option to your program to generate random sentences. 3.11 Add an option to your program to compute the perplexity of a test set. 3.12 You are given a training set of 100 numbers that consists of 91 zeros and 1 each of the other digits 1-9. Now we see the following test set: 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0. What is the unigram perplexity? Exercises 25 Algoet, P. H. and T. M. Cover. 1988. A sandwich proof of the Shannon-McMillan-Breiman theorem. The Annals of Probability, 16(2):899–909. Bahl, L. R., F. Jelinek, and R. L. Mercer. 1983. A maximum likelihood approach to continuous speech recognition. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 5(2):179–190. Baker, J. K. 1975a. The DRAGON system – An overview. IEEE Transactions on ASSP, ASSP-23(1):24–29. Baker, J. K. 1975b. Stochastic modeling for automatic speech understanding. In D. R. Reddy, ed.,Speech Recognition. Academic Press. Bengio, Y ., H. Schwenk, J.-S. Sen ´ecal, F. Morin, and J.-L. Gauvain. 2006. Neural probabilistic language models. In Innovations in Machine Learning, 137–186. Springer. Blodgett, S. L. and B. O’Connor. 2017. Racial disparity in natural language processing: A case study of social media African-American English. FAT/ML Workshop, KDD. Brants, T., A. C. Popat, P. Xu, F. J. Och, and J. Dean. 2007. Large language models in machine translation. EMNLP/CoNLL. Chen, S. F. and J. Goodman. 1999. An empirical study of smoothing techniques for language modeling. Computer Speech and Language, 13:359–394. Chomsky, N. 1956. Three models for the description of language. IRE Transactions on Information Theory , 2(3):113–124. Chomsky, N. 1957. Syntactic Structures. Mouton. Church, K. W. and W. A. Gale. 1991. A comparison of the enhanced Good-Turing and deleted estimation methods for estimating probabilities of English bigrams. Computer Speech and Language, 5:19–54. Cover, T. M. and J. A. Thomas. 1991. Elements of Information Theory. Wiley. Davies, M. 2020. The Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA): One billion words, 1990-2019. https://www.english-corpora.org/coca/. Franz, A. and T. Brants. 2006. All our n-gram are belong to you. https://research.google/blog/ all-our-n-gram-are-belong-to-you/ . Gale, W. A. and K. W. Church. 1994. What is wrong with adding one? In N. Oostdijk and P. de Haan, eds, CorpusBased Research into Language, 189–198. Rodopi. Goodman, J. 2006. A bit of progress in language modeling: Extended version. Technical Report MSR-TR-200172, Machine Learning and Applied Statistics Group, Microsoft Research, Redmond, W A. Heaﬁeld, K. 2011. KenLM: Faster and smaller language model queries. Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation. Heaﬁeld, K., I. Pouzyrevsky, J. H. Clark, and P. Koehn. 2013. Scalable modiﬁed Kneser-Ney language model estimation. ACL. Jeffreys, H. 1948.Theory of Probability, 2nd edition. Clarendon Press. Section 3.23. Jelinek, F. 1990. Self-organized language modeling for speech recognition. In A. Waibel and K.-F. Lee, eds, Readings in Speech Recognition, 450–506. Morgan Kaufmann. Originally distributed as IBM technical report in 1985. Jelinek, F. and R. L. Mercer. 1980. Interpolated estimation of Markov source parameters from sparse data. In E. S. Gelsema and L. N. Kanal, eds, Proceedings, Workshop on Pattern Recognition in Practice, 381–397. North Holland. Jelinek, F., R. L. Mercer, and L. R. Bahl. 1975. Design of a linguistic statistical decoder for the recognition of continuous speech. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, IT-21(3):250–256. Johnson, W. E. 1932. Probability: deductive and inductive problems (appendix to). Mind, 41(164):421–423. Jurafsky, D., C. Wooters, G. Tajchman, J. Segal, A. Stolcke, E. Fosler, and N. Morgan. 1994. The Berkeley restaurant project. ICSLP. Jurgens, D., Y . Tsvetkov, and D. Jurafsky. 2017. Incorporating dialectal variability for socially equitable language identiﬁcation. ACL. Kane, S. K., M. R. Morris, A. Paradiso, and J. Campbell. 2017. “at times avuncular and cantankerous, with the reﬂexes of a mongoose”: Understanding self-expression through augmentative and alternative communication devices. CSCW. King, S. 2020. From African American Vernacular English to African American Language: Rethinking the study of race and language in African Americans’ speech.Annual Review of Linguistics, 6:285–300. Lin, Y ., J.-B. Michel, E. Aiden Lieberman, J. Orwant, W. Brockman, and S. Petrov. 2012. Syntactic annotations for the Google books NGram corpus. ACL. Liu, J., S. Min, L. Zettlemoyer, Y . Choi, and H. Hajishirzi. 2024. Inﬁni-gram: Scaling unbounded n-gram language models to a trillion tokens. ArXiv preprint. Markov, A. A. 1913. Essai d’une recherche statistique sur le texte du roman “Eugene Onegin” illustrant la liaison des epreuve en chain (‘Example of a statistical investigation of the text of “Eugene Onegin” illustrating the dependence between samples in chain’). Izvistia Imperatorskoi Akademii Nauk (Bulletin de l’Acad´emie Imp´eriale des Sciences de St.-P´etersbourg), 7:153–162. Mikolov, T. 2012.Statistical language models based on neural networks. Ph.D. thesis, Brno University of Technology. Miller, G. A. and N. Chomsky. 1963. Finitary models of language users. In R. D. Luce, R. R. Bush, and E. Galanter, eds, Handbook of Mathematical Psychology , volume II, 419–491. John Wiley. Miller, G. A. and J. A. Selfridge. 1950. Verbal context and the recall of meaningful material. American Journal of Psychology, 63:176–185. N´adas, A. 1984. Estimation of probabilities in the language model of the IBM speech recognition system. IEEE Transactions on ASSP, 32(4):859–861. Schwenk, H. 2007. Continuous space language models. Computer Speech & Language, 21(3):492–518. Shannon, C. E. 1948. A mathematical theory of communication. Bell System Technical Journal, 27(3):379–423. Continued in the following volume. Stolcke, A. 1998. Entropy-based pruning of backoff language models. Proc. DARPA Broadcast News Transcription and Understanding Workshop. Stolcke, A. 2002. SRILM – an extensible language modeling toolkit. ICSLP. Trnka, K., D. Yarrington, J. McCaw, K. F. McCoy, and C. Pennington. 2007. The effects of word prediction on communication rate for AAC. NAACL-HLT. Witten, I. H. and T. C. Bell. 1991. The zero-frequency problem: Estimating the probabilities of novel events in adaptive text compression. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 37(4):1085–1094.