Speech and Language Processing. Daniel Jurafsky & James H. Martin. Copyright © 2026. All rights reserved. Draft of January 6, 2026. CHAPTER Text-to-Speech “Words mean more than what is set down on paper. It takes the human voice to infuse them with shades of deeper meaning.” Maya Angelou, I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings The task of mapping from text to speech is a task with an even longer history than speech to text. In Vienna in 1769, Wolfgang von Kempelen built for the Empress Maria Theresa the famous Mechanical Turk, a chess-playing automaton consisting of a wooden box ﬁlled with gears, behind which sat a robot mannequin who played chess by moving pieces with his mechanical arm. The Turk toured Europe and the Americas for decades, defeating Napoleon Bonaparte and even playing Charles Babbage. The Mechanical Turk might have been one of the early successes of artiﬁcial intelligence were it not for the fact that it was, alas, a hoax, powered by a human chess player hidden inside the box. What is less well known is that von Kempelen, an extraordinarily proliﬁc inventor, also built between 1769 and 1790 what was deﬁnitely not a hoax: the ﬁrst full-sentence speech synthesizer, shown partially to the right. His device consisted of a bellows to simulate the lungs, a rubber mouthpiece and a nose aperture, a reed to simulate the vocal folds, various whistles for the fricatives, and a small auxiliary bellows to provide the puff of air for plosives. By moving levers with both hands to open and close apertures, and adjusting the ﬂexible leather “vocal tract”, an operator could produce different consonants and vowels. More than two centuries later, we no longer build our synthesizers out of wood and leather, nor do we need human operators. The modern task oftext-to-speech ortext-to-speech TTS, also called speech synthesis, is exactly the reverse of ASR; to map text:TTS speech synthesis It’s time for lunch! to an acoustic waveform: TTS has a wide variety of applications. It is used in spoken language models that interact with people, for reading text out loud, for games, and to produce speech for sufferers of neurological disorders, like the late astrophysicist Steven Hawking after he lost the use of his voice because of ALS. In this chapter we introduce an algorithm for TTS that, like the ASR algorithms of the prior chapter, are trained on enormous amounts of speech datasets. We’ll also brieﬂy touch on other speech applications. 16.1 TTS overview The task of text-to-speech is to generate a speech waveform that corresponds to a desired text, using in a particular voice speciﬁed by the user. Historically TTS was done by collecting hundreds of hours of speech from a single talker in a lab and training a large system on it. The resulting TTS system only worked in one voice; if you wanted a second voice, you went back and collected data from a second talker. The modern method is instead to train a speaker-independent synthesizer on tens of thousands of hours of speech from thousands of talkers. To create speech in a new voice unseen in training, we use a very small amount of speech from the desired talker to guide the creation of the voice. So the input to a modern TTS system is a text prompt and perhaps 3 seconds of speech from the voice we’d like to generate the speech in. This TTS task is called zero-shot TTS because the desired voice mayzero-shot TTS never have been seen in training. The way modern TTS systems address this task is to use language modeling, and in particular conditional generation. The intuition is to take an enormous dataset of speech, and use an audio tokenizer based on an audio codec to induce discrete audio tokens from that speech that represent the speech. Then we can train a language model whose vocabulary includes both speech tokens and text tokens. We train this language model to take as input two sequences, a text transcript and a small sample of speech from the desired talker, to tokenize both the text and the speech into discrete tokens, and then to conditionally generate discrete samples of the speech corresponding to the text string, in the desired voice. At inference time we prompt this language model with a tokenized text string and a sample of the desired voice (tokenized by the codec into discrete audio tokens) and conditionally generate to produce the desired audio tokens. Then these tokens can be converted into a waveform. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUDIO, SPEECH AND LANGUAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 33, 2025 705 Neural Codec Language Models are Zero-Shot Text to Speech Synthesizers Sanyuan Chen,C h e n g y iW a n g ,Y uW u, Ziqiang Zhang, Long Zhou, Shujie Liu, Member , IEEE, Zhuo Chen, Ya n q i n g L i u, Huaming Wang, Jinyu Li,F e l l o w ,I E E E, Lei He, Sheng Zhao, and Furu Wei Abstract—We introduce a language modeling approach for text to speech synthesis (TTS). Speciﬁcally, we train a neural codec language model (called V ALL-E) using discrete codes derived from an off-the-shelf neural audio codec model, and regard TTS as a conditional language modeling task rather than continuous signal regression as in previous work. During the pre-training stage, we scale up the TTS training data to 50 k hours of English speech which is hundreds of times larger than existing systems. V ALL-E emerges in-context learning capability and can be used to synthesize highquality personalized speech with only a 3-second enrolled recording of an unseen speaker as a prompt. Experiment results show that V ALL-E signiﬁcantly outperforms the state-of-the-art zero-shot TTS system in terms of speech naturalness and speaker similarity. In addition, we ﬁnd V ALL-E could preserve the speaker’s emotion and acoustic environment from the prompt in synthesis. Index Terms —Zero-shot text to speech synthesis, speech generation, voice cloning, language modeling, pre-training, inContext learning. I. I NTRODUCTION T HE last decade has yielded dramatic breakthroughs in speech synthesis through the development of neural networks and end-to-end modeling. Currently, cascaded text to speech (TTS) systems usually leverage a pipeline with an acoustic model and a vocoder using mel spectrograms as the intermediate representations [1], [2], [3]. While advanced TTS systems can synthesize high-quality speech from single or multiple speakers, it still requires high-quality clean data from the recording studio [4], [5]. Large-scale data crawled from the Internet cannot meet the requirement, and always lead to performance degradation. Because the training data is relatively small, current TTS systems still suffer from poor generalization capability. Speaker similarity and speech naturalness drop dramatically for unseen speakers in the zero-shot scenario. To tackle the zero-shot TTS problem, existing work leverages speaker Received 1 March 2024; revised 18 September 2024; accepted 10 January 2025. Date of publication 15 January 2025; date of current version 10 February 2025. The associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was Dr. Raul Fernandez. (Sanyuan Chen, Chengyi Wang, and Yu Wu contributed equally to this work.) (Corresponding author: Shujie Liu.) Sanyuan Chen is with the Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin 150001, China. Chengyi Wang is with the Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China. Ziqiang Zhang is with the University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, China. Yu Wu , L o n g Z h o u , S h u j i e L i u , Z h u o C h e n , Ya n q i n g L i u , H u a m i n g Wa n g , Jinyu Li, Lei He, Sheng Zhao, and Furu Wei are with the Microsoft Corporation, Redmond, W A 98052, US (e-mail: shujliu@microsoft.com). Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TASLPRO.2025.3530270 Fig. 1. The overview of V ALL-E. Unlike the previous pipeline (e.g., text → mel-spectrogram → waveform), the pipeline of V ALL-E is text→ discrete code → waveform. V ALL-E generates the discrete audio codec codes based on text input and acoustic code prompt, corresponding to the target content and the speaker’s voice. adaptation and speaker encoding methods, requiring additional ﬁne-tuning, complex pre-designed features, or heavy structure engineering [6], [7], [8], [9]. Instead of designing a complex and speciﬁc network for this problem, the ultimate solution is to train a model with large and diverse data as much as possible, motivated by the success in the ﬁeld of text generation [10], [11].R e c e n ty e a r sh a v ew i t n e s s e d notable performance improvement for data increase in the text language model, from 16 GB of uncompressed text [12],t o 160 GB [13],t o5 7 0G B [10],a n dﬁ n a l l y ,a r o u n d1 T B[11]. Transferring this success to the ﬁeld of speech synthesis, we introduce V ALL-E, the ﬁrst language model based TTS framework leveraging the large, diverse, and multi-speaker speech data. As shown in Fig. 1,t os y n t h e s i z ep e r s o n a l i z e ds p e e c h( e . g . ,z e r o shot TTS), V ALL-E generates the corresponding acoustic codes based on the acoustic codes of the 3-second enrolled recording and the text input, which constrain the speaker and content information respectively. Finally, the generated acoustic codes are used to synthesize the ﬁnal waveform with the corresponding neural codec decoder [14].T h eu t i l i z a t i o no fd i s c r e t ea c o u s t i c codes derived from an audio codec model allows us to treat TTS as conditional codec language modeling. This approach enables us to employ advanced prompting-based large-model techniques (as in GPTs [10])f o rt h ez e r o s h o tT T Sp r o b l e m . We train VALL-E with Libriheavy corpus[15], a labeled version of Librilight corpus [16] that consists 50 k hours of English speech derived from open-source audio books with over 7000 unique speakers. Compared to previous TTS training datasets, 2998-4173 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artiﬁcial intelligence and similar technologi es. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index. html for more information. Authorized licensed use limited to: Stanford University Libraries. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 16:03:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. Figure 16.1 V ALL-E architecture for personalized TTS (ﬁgure from Chen et al. (2025)). Fig. 16.1 from Chen et al. (2025) shows the intuition for one such TTS system, called V ALL-E. V ALL-E is trained on 60K hours of English speech, from over 7000V ALL-E unique talkers. Systems like V ALL-E have 2 components: 1. The audio tokenizer, generally based on an audio codec, a system we’ll de16.2 • U SING A CODEC TO LEARN DISCRETE AUDIO TOKENS 3 scribe in the next section. Codecs have three parts: an encoder (that turns speech into embedding vectors), a quantizer (that turns the embeddings into discrete tokens) and decoders (that turns the discrete tokens back into speech). 2. The 2-stage conditional language model that can generate audio tokens corresponding to the desired text. We’ll sketch this in Section 16.3. 16.2 Using a codec to learn discrete audio tokens Modern TTS systems are based around converting the waveform into a sequence of discrete audio tokens. This idea of manipulating discrete audio tokens is also useful for other speech-enabled systems like spoken language models , which take text or speech input and can generate text or speech output to solve tasks like speechto-speech translation, diarization, or spoken question answering. Having discrete tokens means that we can make use of language model technology, since language models are specialized for sequences of discrete tokens. Audio tokenizers are thus an important component of the modern speech toolkit. The standard way to learn audio tokens is from a neural audio codec (the wordcodec is formed from coder/decoder). Historically a codec was a hardware device that digitized analog symbols. More generally we use the word to mean a mechanism for encoding analog speech signals into a digitized compressed representation that can be efﬁciently stored and sent. Codecs are still used for compression, but for TTS and also for spoken language models, we employ them for converting speech into discrete tokens. Of course the digital representation of speech we described in Chapter 14 is already discrete. For example 16 kHz speech stored in 16-bit format could be thought of as a series of 2 16 = 65,536 symbols, with 16,000 of those symbols per second of speech. But a system that generates 16,000 symbols per second makes the speech signal too long to be feasibly processed by a language model, especially one based on transformers with their inefﬁcient quadratic attention. Instead we want symbols that represent longer chunks of speech, perhaps something on the order of a few hundred tokens a second. x Encoder Decoder zt zqt Quantization qt,1 qt,2 … qt,Nc x^ Figure 16.2 Standard architecture of an audio tokenizer performing inference, ﬁgure adapted from Mousavi et al. (2025). An input waveformx is encoded (generally using a series of downsampling convolution networks) into a series of embeddings zt. Each embedding is then passed through a quantizer to produce a series of quantized tokens qt. To regenerate the speech signal, the quantized tokens are re-mapped back to a vectorzqt and then encoded (usually using a series of upsampling convolution networks) back to a waveform. We’ll discuss how the architecture is trained in Section 16.2.4. Fig. 16.2 adapted from Mousavi et al. (2025). shows the standard architecture of an audio tokenizer. Audio tokenizers take as input an audio waveform, and are trained to recreate the same audio waveform out, via an intermediate representation consisting of discrete tokens created by vector quantization. Audio tokenizers have three stages: 1. an encoder maps the acoustic waveform, a series ofT values x = x1, x2, ...,xT , to a sequence of τ embeddings z = z1,z2, ...,zτ. τ is typically 100-1000 times smaller than T . 2. a vector quantizer that takes each embedding zt corresponding to part of the waveform, and represents it by a sequence of discrete tokens each taken from one of the Nc codebooks, qt = qt,1, qt,2, ...,qt,Nc. The vector quantizer also sums the vector codewords from each codebook to create a quantizer output vector zqt. 3. a decoder that generates a lossy reconstructed waveform span ˆx from the quantizer output vector zqt. Audio tokenizers are generally learned end-to-end, using loss functions that reward a tokenization that allows the system to reconstruct the input waveform. In the following subsections we’ll go through the components of one particular tokenizer, the ENCODEC tokenizer of D´efossez et al. (2023). 16.2.1 The Encoder and Decoder for the ENCODEC model Conv1D (k=7, n=C) Encoder EncoderBlock (N=16C, S=8) EncoderBlock (N=8C, S=5) EncoderBlock (N=4C, S=4) EncoderBlock (N=2C, S=2) LSTM EncoderBlock (N, S) Conv1D (K=2S, N=C, Stride=S) Residual Unit (N) Conv1D (k=7, n=D) Waveform @ 24kHz Embeddings @ 75Hz … + Residual Unit Conv1D (K=3, N=C) Conv1D (K=3, N=C) Conv1D (k=7, n=C) Decoder DecoderBlock (N=16C, S=8) DecoderBlock (N=4C, S=4) DecoderBlock (N=2C, S=2) Conv1DT (k=7, n=D) Waveform @ 24kHz Embeddings @ 75Hz … DecoderBlock (N, S) Conv1DT (K=2S, N=C) Residual Unit DecoderBlock (N=8C, S=5) LSTM D D Figure 16.3 The encoder and decoder stages of the E NCODEC model. The goal of the encoder is to downsample an input waveform by encoded it as a series of embeddings zt at 75Hz, i.e. 75 embeddings a second. Because the original signal was represented at 24kHz, this is a downsampling of 24000 75 = 320 times. Between the encoder and decoder is a quantization step producing a lossy embedding zqt. The goal of the decoder is to take the lossy embedding zqt and upsample it, converting it back to a waveform. The encoder and decoder of the E NCODEC model (D ´efossez et al., 2023) are sketched in Fig. 16.3. The goal of the encoder is to downsample a span of waveform at time t, which is at 24kHz—one second of speech has 24,000 real values—to an embedding representation zt at 75Hz—one second of audio is represented by 75 16.2 • U SING A CODEC TO LEARN DISCRETE AUDIO TOKENS 5 vectors, each of dimensionality D. For the purposes of this explanation, we’ll use D = 256. This downsampling is accomplished by having a series of encoder blocks that are made up of convolutional layers with strides larger than 1 that iteratively downsample the audio, as we discussed at the end of Section ??. The convolution blocks are sketched in Fig. 16.3, and include a long series of convolutions as well as residual units that add a convolution to the prior input. The output of the encoder is an embeddingzt at time t, 75 of which are produced per second. This embedding is then quantized (as discussed in the next section), turning each embeddingzt into a series ofNc discrete symbols qt = qt,1, qt,2, ...,qt,Nc, and also turning the series of symbols into a new quantizer output vector zqt. Finally, the decoder takes the output embedding from the quantizer zqt and generates a waveform via a symmetric set of convnets that upsample the audio. In summary, a 24kHz waveform comes through, we encode/downsample it into a vector zt of dimensionality D = 256, quantize it into discrete symbols qt, turn it back into a vector zqt of dimensionality D = 256, and then decode/upsample that vector back into a waveform at 24kHz. 16.2.2 Vector Quantization The goal of the vector quantization or VQ step is to turn a series of vectors into avector quantization VQ series of discrete symbols. Historically vector quantization (Gray, 1984) was used to compress a speech signal, to reduce the bit rate for transmission or storage. To compress a sequence of vector representations of speech, we turn each vector into an integer, an index representing a class or cluster. Then instead of transmitting a big vector of ﬂoating point numbers, we transmit that integer index. At the other end of the transmission, we reconstitute the vector from the index. For TTS and other modern speech applications we use vector quantization for a different reason: because VQ conveniently creates discrete tokens, and those ﬁt well into the language modeling paradigm, since language models do well at predicting sequences of discrete tokens. In practice for the ENCODEC model and other audio tokenizers, we use a powerful form of vector quantization calledresidual vector quantizationthat we’ll deﬁne in the following section. But it will be helpful to ﬁrst see the basic VQ algorithm before we extend it. Vector quantization has a training phase and an inference phase. We already introduced the core of the basic VQ training algorithm when we described k-means clustering of vectors in Section ??, since k-means clustering is the most common algorithm used to implement VQ. To review, in VQ training, we run a big set of speech waveﬁles through an encoder to generate N vectors, each one corresponding to some frame of speech. Then we cluster all these N vectors into k clusters; k is set by the designer as a parameter to the algorithm as the number of discrete symbols we want, generally with k << N. In the simplest VQ algorithm, we use the iterative k-means algorithm to learn the clusters. Recall from Section ?? that k-means is a two-step algorithm based on iteratively updating a set of k centroid vectors. A centroid is the geometric center of a set of a points in n-dimensional space.centroid The k-means algorithm for clustering starts by assigning a random vector to each cluster k. Then there are two iterative steps. In the assignment step, given a set of k current centroids and the entire dataset of vectors, each vector is assigned to the cluster whose codeword is the closest (by squared Euclidean distance). In the re1.2 0.1 … 0.9 -55 -9 0.2 Encoder 256-d vector to be quantized Similarity Codebook 256-d codewords (vectors) 1 Cluster #2345 1024… … Vector Quantizer Output: discrete symbol Figure 16.4 The basic VQ algorithm at inference time, after the codebook has been learned. The input is a span of speech encoded by the encoder into a vector of dimensionality D = 256. This vector is compared with each codeword (cluster centroid) in the codebook. The codeword for cluster 3 is most similar, so the VQ outputs 3 as the discrete representation of this vector. estimation step, the codeword for each cluster is recomputed by recalculating a new mean vector. The result is that the clusters and their centroids slowly adjust to the training space. We iterate back and forth between these two steps until the algorithm converges. VQ can also be used as part of end-to-end training, as we will discuss below, in which case instead of iterative k-means, we instead recompute the means during minibatch training via online algorithms like exponential moving averages. At the end of clustering, the cluster index can be used as a discrete symbol. Each cluster is also associated with a codeword, the vector which is the centroid of allcodeword the vectors in the cluster. We call the list of cluster ids (tokens) together with their codeword the codebook, and we often call the cluster id the code.codebook code In inference, when a new vector comes in, we compare it to each vector in the codebook. Whichever codeword is closest, we assign it to that codeword’s associated cluster. Fig. 16.4 shows an intuition of this inference step in the context of speech encoding: 1. an input speech waveform is encoded into a vector v, 2. this input vector v is compared to each of the 1024 possible codewords in the codebook, 3. v is found to be most similar to codeword 3, 4. and so the output of VQ is the discrete symbol 3 as a representation of v. As we will see below, for training the ENCODEC model end-to-end we will need a way to turn this discrete symbol back into a waveform. For simple VQ we do that by directly using the codeword for that cluster, passing that codeword to the decoder for it to reconstruct the waveform. Of course the codeword vector won’t exactly match the original vector encoding of the input speech span, especially with only 1024 possible codewords, but the hope is that it’s at least close if our codebook is good, and the decoder will still produce reasonable speech. Nonetheless, more powerful methods are usually used, as we’ll see in the next section. 16.2 • U SING A CODEC TO LEARN DISCRETE AUDIO TOKENS 7 16.2.3 Residual Vector Quantization In practice, simple VQ doesn’t produce good enough reconstructions, at least not with codebook sizes of 1024. 1024 codeword vectors just isn’t enough to represent the wide variety of embeddings we get from encoding all possible speech waveforms. So what the E NCODEC model (and many other audio tokenization methods) use instead is a more sophisticated variant called residual vector quantization, orresidual vector quantization RVQ. In residual vector quantization, we use multiple codebooks arranged in a kindRVQ of hierarchy. Figure 2: The neural audio codec model revisit. Because RVQ is employed, the ﬁrst quantizer plays the most important role in reconstruction, and the impact from others gradually decreases. we can explicitly control the content in speech synthesis. Another direction is to apply pre-training to the neural TTS. Chung et al. [2018] pre-trains speech decoder in TTS through autoregressive mel-spectrogram prediction. In Ao et al. [2022], the authors propose a uniﬁed-modal encoder-decoder framework SpeechT5, which can leverage unlabeled speech and text data to pre-train all components of TTS model. Tjandra et al. [2019] quantizes unlabeled speech into discrete tokens by a VQV AE model [ van den Oord et al. , 2017], and train a model with the token-to-speech sequence. They demonstrate that the pre-trained model only requires a small amount of real data for ﬁne-tuning. Bai et al. [2022] proposes mask and reconstruction on mel spectrogram and showing better performance on speech editing and synthesis. Previous TTS pre-training work leverages less than 1K hours of data, whereas VA L L Eis pre-trained with 60K hours of data. Furthermore, VA L L Eis the ﬁrst to use audio codec codes as intermediate representations, and emerge in-context learning capability in zero-shot TTS. 3 Background: Speech Quantization Since audio is typically stored as a sequence of 16-bit integer values, a generative model is required to output 216 =6 5, 536 probabilities per timestep to synthesize the raw audio. In addition, the audio sample rate exceeding ten thousand leads to an extraordinarily long sequence length, making it more intractable for raw audio synthesis. To this end, speech quantization is required to compress integer values and sequence length. µ-law transformation can quantize each timestep to 256 values and reconstruct high-quality raw audio. It is widely used in speech generative models, such as WaveNet [van den Oord et al. , 2016], but the inference speed is still slow since the sequence length is not reduced. Recently, vector quantization is widely applied in self-supervised speech models for feature extraction, such as vq-wav2vec [Baevski et al., 2020a] and HuBERT [Hsu et al., 2021]. The following work [Lakhotia et al., 2021, Du et al., 2022] shows the codes from self-supervised models can also reconstruct content, and the inference speed is faster than WaveNet. However, the speaker identity has been discarded and the reconstruction quality is low [ Borsos et al., 2022]. AudioLM [ Borsos et al., 2022] trains speech-to-speech language models on both k-means tokens from a self-supervised model and acoustic tokens from a neural codec model, leading to high-quality speech-to-speech generation. In this paper, we follow AudioLM [ Borsos et al. , 2022] to leverage neural codec models to represent speech in discrete tokens. To compress audio for network transmission, codec models are able to encode waveform into discrete acoustic codes and reconstruct high-quality waveform even if the speaker is unseen in training. Compared to traditional audio codec approaches, the neural-based codec is signiﬁcantly better at low bitrates, and we believe the quantized tokens contain sufﬁcient information about the speaker and recording conditions. Compared to other quantization methods, the audio codec shows the following advantages: 1) It contains abundant speaker information and acoustic information, which could maintain speaker identity in reconstruction compared to HuBERT codes [Hsu et al. , 2021]. 2) There is an off-the-shelf codec decoder to convert discrete tokens into a waveform, without the additional efforts on vocoder training like VQ-based methods that operated on spectrum [Du et al., 2022]. 3) It could reduce the length of time steps for efﬁciency to address the problem in µ-law transformation [van den Oord et al. , 2016]. Figure 16.5 Residual VQ (ﬁgure from Chen et al. (2025)). We run VQ on the encoder output embedding to produce a discrete symbol and the corresponding codeword. We then look at the residual, the difference between the encoder output embedding zt and the codeword chosen by VQ. We then take a second codebook and run VQ on this residual. We repeat the process until we have 8 tokens. The idea is very simple. We run standard VQ with a codebook just as in Fig. 16.4 in the prior section. Then for an input embedding zt we take the codeword vector that is produced, let’s call itzq1t for the zt as quantiﬁed by codebook 1, and take the difference between the two: residual = zt− z(1) q t . (16.1) This residual is the error in the VQ; the part of the original vector that the VQresidual didn’t capture. The residual is kind of a rounding error; it’s as if in VQ we ‘round’ the vector to the nearest codeword, and that creates some error. So we then take that residual vector and pass it through another vector quantizer! That gives us a second codeword that represents the residual part of the vector. We then take the residual from the second codeword, and do this again. The total result is 8 codewords (the original codeword and the 7 residuals). That means for RVQ we represent the original speech span by a sequence of 8 discrete symbols (instead of 1 discrete symbol in basic VQ). Fig. 16.5 shows the intuition. What do we do when we want to reconstruct the speech? The method used in ENCODEC RVQ is again simple: we take the 8 codewords and add them together! The resulting vector zqt is then passed through the decoder to generate a waveform. . 16.2.4 Training the ENCODEC model of audio tokens The E NCODEC model (like similar audio tokenizer models) is trained end to end. The input is a waveform, a span of speech of perhaps 1 or 10 seconds extracted from a longer original waveform. The desired output is the same waveform span, since the model is a kind of autoencoder that learns to map to itself. The model is trained to do this reconstruction on large speech datasets like Common V oice (Ardila et al., 2020) (over 30,000 hours of speech in 133 languages) as well as other audio data like Audio Set (Gemmeke et al., 2017) (1.7 million 10 sec excerpts from YouTube videos labeled from a large ontology including natural, animal, and machine sounds, music, and so on). x Encoder Decoder zt zqt Quantization qt,1 qt,2 … qt,Nc x^ 𝓛reconstruction 𝓛VQ 𝓛GAN Figure 16.6 Architecture of audio tokenizer training, ﬁgure adapted from Mousavi et al. (2025). The audio tokenizer is trained with a weighted combination of various loss functions, summarized in the ﬁgure and described below. The E NCODEC model, like most audio tokenizers, is trained with a number of loss functions, as suggested in Fig. 16.6. The reconstruction loss Lreconstruction mea-reconstruction loss sures how similar the output waveform is to the input waveform, for example by the sum-squared difference between the original and reconstructed audio: Lreconstruction(x, ˆx) = T∑ t=1 ||xt− ˆxt||2 (16.2) Similarity can additionally be measured in the frequency domain, by comparing the original and reconstructed mel-spectrogram, again using sum-squared (L2) distance or L1 distance or some combination. Another kind of loss is the adversarial loss LGAN. For this loss we train aadversarial loss generative adversarial network, a generator and a binary discriminator D, which is a classiﬁer to distinguish between the true waveﬁle x and a generated one. We want to train the model to fool this discriminator, so the better the discriminator, the worse our reconstruction must be, and so we use the discriminator’s success as a loss function, We can also incorporate various features from the generator. Finally, we need a loss for the quantizer. This is because having a quantizer in the middle of end-to-end training causes problems in propagation of the gradient in the backward pass of training, because the quantization step is not differentiable. We deal with this problem in two ways. First, we ignore the quantization step in the backward pass. Instead we copy the gradients from the output of the quantizer (zqt) back to the input of the quantizer ( zt), a method called the straight-through estimator (Van Den Oord et al., 2017). But then we need a method to make sure the code words in the vector quantizer step get updated during training. One method is to start these off using k-means clustering of the vectors zt to get an initial clustering. Then we can add to a loss component, LVQ, which will be a function of the difference between the encoder 16.3 • VALL-E: G ENERATING AUDIO WITH 2-STAGE LM 9 output vector zt and the reconstructed vector after the quantizationzqt, i.e. the codeword, summed over all the Nc codebooks and residuals. LVQ(x, ˆx) = T∑ t=1 Nc∑ c=1 ||z(c)t− z(c) q t|| (16.3) The total loss function can then just be a weighted sum of these losses: L(x, ˆx) = λ1Lreconstruction(x, ˆx) +λ2LGAN(x, ˆx) +λ3LVQ(x, ˆx) (16.4) 16.3 V ALL-E: Generating audio with 2-stage LM As we summarized in the introduction, the structure of TTS systems like V ALL-E is to take as input a text to be synthesized and a sample of the voice to be used, and tokenize both, using BPE for the text and an audio codec for the speech. We then use a language model to conditionally generate discrete audio tokens corresponding to the text prompt, in the voice of the speech sample. Autoregressive (AR) Transformer TextAudio Prompt CT’+1,1 CT’+2,1 CT,1 CT’+1,2 CT’+1,3 CT’+2,2 CT,2 CT’+2,3 x C CT,3 CT’+1,1 CT’+2,1 CT,1 x C x C x C CT’+1,1 CT’+1,2 … … … CT,1CT’+2,1 CT’+2,2 CT,2 … Non-Autoregressive Non-Autoregressive Non-Autoregressive Output code sequence … Figure 16.7 The 2-stage language modelling approach for V ALL-E, showing the inference stage for the autoregressive transformer and the ﬁrst 3 of the 7 non-autoregressive transformers. The output sequence of discrete audio codes is generated in two stages. First the autoregressive LM generates all the codes for the ﬁrst quantizer from left to right. Then the non-autoregressive model is called 7 times to generate the remaining codes conditioned on all the codes from the preceding quantizer, including conditioning on the codes to the right. Instead of doing this conditional generation with a single autoregressive language model, V ALL-E does the conditional generation in a 2-stage process, using two distinct language models. This architectural choice is inﬂuenced by the hierarchical nature of the RVQ quantizer that generates the audio tokens. The output of the ﬁrst RVQ quantizer is the most important token to the ﬁnal speech, while the subsequent quantizers contribute less and less residual information to the ﬁnal signal. So the language model generates the acoustic codes in two stages. First, an autoregressive LM generates the ﬁrst-quantizer codes for the entire output sequence, given the input text and enrolled audio. Then given those codes, a non-autoregressive LM is run 7 times, each time taking as input the output of the initial autoregressive codes and the prior non-autoregressive quantizer and thus generating the codes from the remaining quantizers one by one. Fig. 16.7 shows the intuition for the inference step. Now let’s see the architecture in a bit more detail. For training, we are given an audio sample y and its tokenized text transcription x = [x0, x1, . . . ,xL]. We use a pretrained E NCODEC to convert y into a code matrix C. Let T be the number of downsampled vectors output by E NCODEC , with 8 codes per vector. Then we can represent the encoder output as CT×8 = ENCODEC (y) (16.5) Here C is a two-dimensional acoustic code matrix that has T× 8 entries, where the columns represent time and the rows represent different quantizers. That is, the row vector ct,: of the matrix contains the 8 codes for thet-th frame, and the column vector c:, j contains the code sequence from the j-th vector quantizer where j∈ [1, ...,8]. Given the text x and audio C, we train the TTS as a conditional code language model to maximize the likelihood of C conditioned on x: L = −log p(C|x) = −log T∏ t=0 p(c<t,:,x) (16.6) CHEN et al.: NEURAL CODEC LANGUAGE MODELS ARE ZERO-SHOT TEXT TO SPEECH SYNTHESIZERS 709 Fig. 3. Training overview of V ALL-E. We regard TTS as a conditional codec language modeling task. We structure V ALL-E as two conditional codec languag e models in a hierarchical structure. The AR model is used to generate each code of the ﬁrst code sequence in an autoregressive manner, while the NAR model is used to generate each remaining code sequence based on the previous code sequences in a non-autoregressive manner. B. Hierarchical Structure: AR and NAR Model As introduced in Section III,t h ec o d e cc o d e sd e r i v e df r o mt h e neural audio codec model with RVQ exhibit two key properties: (1) A single speech sample is encoded into multiple code sequences with multiple quantizers in the audio codec model. (2) Ah i e r a r c h i c a ls t r u c t u r ei sp r e s e n tw h e r et h ec o d es e q u e n c ef r o m the ﬁrst quantizer covers most of the acoustic information, while subsequent code sequences contain the residual acoustic information from their predecessors, serving to reﬁne and augment the acoustic details. Inspired by these properties, we design V ALL-E as two conditional codec language models in a hierarchical structure: an Autoregressive (AR) codec language model and a NonAutoregressive (NAR) codec language model. The AR model generates sequence of the ﬁrst code for each frame in an autoregressive manner, while the NAR model generates each remaining code sequence based on the previous code sequences in a non-autoregressive manner. Both models utilize the same Transformer architecture with a text embedding layer, a code embedding layer, and a code prediction layer. We use distinct embeddings for the code from different codec quantizers and share the parameters of the code prediction layer with the parameters of the code embedding layer. Compared to the AR model, the NAR model also have a code ID embedding layer to specify the ID of the code sequence to predict. The AR model and NAR model have different attention mask strategies: the AR model uses the causal attention strategy and the NAR model uses the full attention strategy, as shown in the right part of Fig. 3. The combination of the AR and NAR models offers a balance between speech quality and inference speed. The AR model contributes to better speech quality with its ﬂexibility for acoustic sequence length prediction, as it ensures the rate of the generated speech matches the enrolled recording. This is particularly useful given the difﬁculty of training a length predictor for different speakers whose speaking speeds can vary signiﬁcantly. On the other hand, the NAR model enhances inference speed. Once the acoustic sequence length has been determined by the AR model, the NAR model can generate codes for all timesteps simultaneously, thus reducing the time complexity from O(T ) to O(1). C. Training: Conditional Codec Language Modeling As depicted in Fig. 3,V A L L Ei st r a i n e du s i n gt h ec o n d i tional codec language modeling method. It is noteworthy that the training of V ALL-E requires only simple utterance-wise audio-transcription pair data, and no complex data such as force-alignment information or additional audio clips of the same speaker for reference. This greatly simpliﬁes the process of collecting and processing training data, facilitating scalability. Speciﬁcally, for each audio and corresponding transcription in the training dataset, we initially utilize the audio codec encoder and text tokenizer to obtain the codec matrix C = [c0,:, c1,:,..., cT,:] and the text sequence x =[ x0,x 1,...,x L], respectively. These are then used to train the AR model and the NAR model using the conditional codec language modeling method. 1) Autoregressive Codec Language Modeling: The AR model is trained to predict ﬁrst code sequence c:,1 conditioned on the text sequence x in an autoregressive manner. As shown in the lower middle part of Fig. 3, we ﬁrst obtain the text embedding sequence Ex =[ ex 0 , ex 1 ,..., ex L] and the code embedding sequence Ec =[ ec 0, ec 1,..., ec T ] using the text embedding matrix Wx and the code embedding matrix Wc, respectively. ex i = Wx ⊙ xi, (7) ec t = Wc ⊙ ct,1, (8) where ⊙ denotes index selection. We concatenate the text embedding sequence and the code embedding sequence, inserting the embedding of special tokens < eos > and < bos > in between: E = Ex ∥ [e<eos>, e<bos>] ∥ Ec, (9) where || indicates concatenation. We then separately add the learnable position embedding to the text embedding sequence Authorized licensed use limited to: Stanford University Libraries. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 16:03:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. Figure 16.8 Training procedure for V ALL-E. Given the text prompt, the autoregressive transformer is ﬁrst trained to generate each code of the ﬁrst-quantizer code sequence, autoregressively The the non-autoregressive transformer generates the rest of the codes. Figure from Chen et al. (2025). Fig. 16.8 shows the intuition. On the left, we have an audio sample and its transcription, and both are tokenized. Then we append an [ EOS ] and [ BOS ] token to x and an [EOS ] token to the end ofC and train the autoregressive transformer to predict the acoustic tokens, starting with c0,1, until [ EOS ], and then the non-autoregressive transformers to ﬁll in the other tokens. During inference, we are given a text sequence to be spoken as well asy′, an enrolled speech sample from some unseen speaker, for which we have the transcription 16.4 • TTS E VALUATION 11 transcript(y′). We ﬁrst run the codec to get an acoustic code matrix fory′, which will be CP = C:T′,: = [c0,:,c1,:, . . .cT′,: :]. Next we concatenate the transcription of y′ to the text sequence to be spoken to create the total input textx, which we pass through a text tokenizer. At this stage we thus have a tokenized text x and a tokenized audio prompt CP. Then we generate CT = C>T′,: = [cT′+1,:, . . .cT,:] conditioned on the text sequence x and the prompt CP: CT = argmax CT p(CT|CP,x) = argmax CT T∏ t=T′+1 p(ct,:|c<t,:,x) (16.7) Then the generated tokens CT can be converted by the E NCODEC decoder into a waveform. Fig. 16.9 shows the intuition. 710 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUDIO, SPEECH AND LANGUAGE PROCESSING, VOL. 33, 2025 and the code embedding sequence. The AR model is fed with E and trained to predict corresponding code sequence with as p e c i a lt o k e n< eos > appended at the end using a code prediction layer. Due to the causal attention mask strategy, the prediction of each token ct,1 can only attend to the text sequence x and the previous codes c<t,1,a sd e m o n s t r a t e di nt h el o w e r right part of Fig. 3. Overall, the AR model θAR is optimized by minimizing the negative log likelihood of the ﬁrst code sequence c:,1 conditioned on the text sequence x: LAR = − log p(c:,1|x; θAR) (10) = − log T∏ t=0 p(ct,1|c<t,1, x; θAR). (11) 2) Non-Autoregressive Codec Language Modeling: Given the ﬁrst code sequence generated by the AR model, the NAR model is trained to generate each remaining code sequence c:,j conditioned on the text sequence x and the preceding code sequences C:,<j in a non-autoregressive manner, where j ∈ [2,..., 8]. As we have access to all 8 code sequences of the prompt during inference, to better model the speaker information of the prompt, during training, we explicitly split the code matrix C into an acoustic condition C:T ′,: and target code matrix C>T ′,: with a randomly sampled lengthT ′.T h em o d e li st h e no p t i m i z e d to predict each target code sequence c>T ′,j conditioned on the text sequence x,a l l8c o d es e q u e n c e si nt h ea c o u s t i cc o n d i t i o n C:T ′,: and the preceding code sequences in the target code matrix C:,<j in a non-autoregressive manner. As shown in the upper middle part of Fig.3, we ﬁrst obtain the text embedding sequence Ex =[ ex 0 , ex 1 ,..., ex L] using the text embedding matrix Wx,a sd e n o t e di n(7).T h e n ,w eo b t a i nt h e code embedding sequence Ec =[ ec 0, ec 1,..., ec T ] by obtaining all the code embeddings in the acoustic condition C:T ′,: and target code matrix C>T ′ ,<j with the code embedding matrix Wc,a n ds u m m i n gt h e ma l o n gw i t ht h ec o d ed i m e n s i o n : ec t = {∑8 k=1 Wc ⊙ ct,k,t ≤ T ′ ∑j−1 k=1 Wc ⊙ ct,k,t > T ′ . (12) Next, we obtain the code ID embedding eid with the code ID embedding matrix Wid. eid = Wid ⊙ j. (13) We concatenate the text embedding sequence, the code embedding sequence, and the code ID embedding, inserting the embedding of the special token < eos > in the middle: E = Ex ∥ [e<eos>] ∥ Ec ∥ [e<eos>, eid]. (14) We then separately add the learnable position embedding to the text embedding sequence and the code embedding sequence, similar to the AR model. The NAR model is fed with E and trained to predict the corresponding code sequence c:,j using ac o d ep r e d i c t i o nl a y e r .W i t ht h ef u l la t t e n t i o nm a s ks t r a t e g y , the prediction of each token ct,j can attend to the entire input sequence, as depicted in the upper right part of Fig. 3. Fig. 4. Inference overview of V ALL-E. We perform zero-shot TTS via prompting the conditional codec language model. Overall, the NAR model is optimized by minimizing the negative log likelihood of each j-th target code sequence c>T ′,j conditioned on the text sequence x,a l lt h ec o d es e q u e n c e so f the acoustic condition C:T ′ ,: and the preceding j − 1 target code sequences c>T ′,<j . LNAR = − log p(C>T ′ ,>1|x, C<T ′ ,:, c>T ′ ,1; θNAR) (15) = − 8∑ j=2 log p(c>T ′ ,j |x, C<T ′ ,:, C>T ′ ,<j ; θNAR). (16) In practice, to optimize computational efﬁciency during training, we do not calculate the training loss by iterating over all values of j and aggregating the corresponding losses. Instead, during each training step, we randomly select a j ∈ [2,..., 8] and optimize the model using the training loss: LNAR_step = − log p(c>T ′,j |x, C<T ′ ,:, C>T ′ ,<j ; θNAR). (17) D. Inference: In-Context Learning Via Prompting In-context learning is a remarkable capability of text-based language models, enabling them to predict labels for unseen inputs without requiring additional parameter updates. A TTS model is considered to possess in-context learning capability if it can synthesize high-quality speech for unseen speakers without the need of ﬁne-tuning. However, previous TTS systems have exhibited limited in-context learning capability, either necessitating additional ﬁne-tuning or suffering signiﬁcant degradation in performance for unseen speakers. For language models, prompting is necessary to enable incontext learning in the zero-shot scenario. In this work, we propose performing the zero-shot TTS task via prompting during inference. As depicted in Fig. 4,g i v e nt h et e x ts e n t e n c ea n d the enrolled speech sample of the unseen speaker along with its corresponding transcription, we ﬁrst concatenate the speech transcription and the text sentence. This concatenated text is encoded into the text sequence x using the text tokenizer to serve as the text condition. The speech sample is converted into a code matrix CP = C:T ′,: =[ c0,:, c1,:,..., cT ′ ,:] using the audio codec encoder to serve as the prompt. By prompting Authorized licensed use limited to: Stanford University Libraries. Downloaded on August 18,2025 at 16:03:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. Figure 16.9 Inference procedure for V ALL-E. Figure from Chen et al. (2025). The transcript for the 3 seconds of enrolled speech is ﬁrst prepended to the text to be generated, and both the speech and text are tokenized. Next the autoregressive transformer starts generating the ﬁrst codes ct′+1,1 conditioned on the transcript and acoustic prompt. See Chen et al. (2025) for more details on the transformer components and other details of training. 16.4 TTS Evaluation TTS systems are evaluated by humans, by playing an utterance to listeners and asking them to give amean opinion score(MOS), a rating of how good the synthesizedMOS utterances are, usually on a scale from 1–5. We can then compare systems by comparing their MOS scores on the same sentences (using, e.g., paired t-tests to test for signiﬁcant differences). If we are comparing exactly two systems (perhaps to see if a particular change actually improved the system), we can also compare using CMOS (ComparativeCMOS MOS). where users give their preference on which of the two utterances is better. CMOS scores range from -3 (the system is much worse than the reference) to 3 (the system is better than the reference) Here we play the same sentence synthesized by two different systems. The human listeners choose which of the two utterances they like better. We do this for say 50 sentences (presented in random order) and compare the number of sentences preferred for each system. Although speech synthesis systems are best evaluated by human listeners, some automatic metrics can be used to add more information. For example we can run the output through an ASR system and compute the word error rate (WER) to see how robust the synthesized output is. Or for measuring how well the voice output of the TTS system matches the enrolled voice, we can treat the task as if it were speaker veriﬁcation, passing the two voices to a speaker veriﬁcation system and using the resulting score as a similarity score. 16.5 Other speech tasks There are a wide variety of other speech-related tasks. Speaker diarization is the task of determining ‘who spoke when’ in a longspeaker diarization multi-speaker audio recording, marking the start and end of each speaker’s turns in the interaction. This can be useful for transcribing meetings, classroom speech, or medical interactions. Often diarization systems use voice activity detection (V AD) to ﬁnd segments of continuous speech, extract speaker embedding vectors, and cluster the vectors to group together segments likely from the same speaker. More recent work is investigating end-to-end algorithms to map directly from input speech to a sequence of speaker labels for each frame. Speaker recognition, is the task of identifying a speaker. We generally distin-speaker recognition guish the subtasks of speaker veriﬁcation , where we make a binary decision (isspeaker veriﬁcation this speaker X or not?), such as for security when accessing personal information over the telephone, and speaker identiﬁcation, where we make a one of N decision trying to match a speaker’s voice against a database of many speakers. In the task of language identiﬁcation, we are given a waveﬁle and must identifylanguage identiﬁcation which language is being spoken; this is an important part of building multilingual models, creating datasets, and even plays a role in online systems. The task of wake word detection is to detect a word or short phrase, usually inwake word order to wake up a voice-enable assistant like Alexa, Siri, or the Google Assistant. The goal with wake words is build the detection into small devices at the computing edge, to maintain privacy by transmitting the least amount of user speech to a cloudbased server. Thus wake word detectors need to be fast, small footprint software that can ﬁt into embedded devices. Wake word detectors usually use the same frontend feature extraction we saw for ASR, often followed by a whole-word classiﬁer. 16.6 Spoken Language Models TBD 16.7 • S UMMARY 13 16.7 Summary This chapter introduced the fundamental algorithms of text-to-speech (TTS). • A common modern algorithm for TTS is to use conditional generation with a language model over audio tokens learned by a codec model. • A neural audio codec, short for coder/decoder, is a system that encodes analog speech signals into a digitized, discrete compressed representation for compression. • The discrete symbols that a codec produces as its compressed representation can be used as discrete codes for language modeling. • A codec includes an encoder that uses convnets to downsample speech into a downsampled embedding, a quantizer that converts the embedding into a series of discrete tokens, and a decoder that uses convnets to upsample the tokens/embedding back into a lossy reconstructed waveform. • Vector Quantization (VQ) is a method for turning a series of vectors into a series of discrete symbols. This can be done by using k-means clustering, and then creating a codebook in which each code is represented by a vector at the centroid of each cluster, called a codeword. Input vector can be assigned the nearest codeword cluster. • Residual Vector Quantization (RVQ) is a hierarchical version of vector quantization that produces multiple codes for an input vector by ﬁrst quantizing a vector into a codebook, and then quantizing the residual (the difference between the codeword and the input vector) and then iterating. • TTS systems like V ALL-Etake a text to be synthesized and a sample of the voice to be used, tokenize with BPE (text) and an audio codec (speech) and then use an LM to conditionally generate discrete audio tokens corresponding to the text prompt, in the voice of the speech sample. • TTS is evaluated by playing a sentence to human listeners and having them give a mean opinion score (MOS). Historical Notes As we noted at the beginning of the chapter, speech synthesis is one of the earliest ﬁelds of speech and language processing. The 18th century saw a number of physical models of the articulation process, including the von Kempelen model mentioned above, as well as the 1773 vowel model of Kratzenstein in Copenhagen using organ pipes. The early 1950s saw the development of three early paradigms of waveform synthesis: formant synthesis, articulatory synthesis, and concatenative synthesis. Formant synthesizers originally were inspired by attempts to mimic human speech by generating artiﬁcial spectrograms. The Haskins Laboratories Pattern Playback Machine generated a sound wave by painting spectrogram patterns on a moving transparent belt and using reﬂectance to ﬁlter the harmonics of a waveform (Cooper et al., 1951); other very early formant synthesizers include those of Lawrence (1953) and Fant (1951). Perhaps the most well-known of the formant synthesizers were the Klatt formant synthesizer and its successor systems, including the MITalk system (Allen et al., 1987) and the Klattalk software used in Digital Equipment Corporation’s DECtalk (Klatt, 1982). See Klatt (1975) for details. A second early paradigm, concatenative synthesis, seems to have been ﬁrst proposed by Harris (1953) at Bell Laboratories; he literally spliced together pieces of magnetic tape corresponding to phones. Soon afterwards, Peterson et al. (1958) proposed a theoretical model based on diphones, including a database with multiple copies of each diphone with differing prosody, each labeled with prosodic features including F0, stress, and duration, and the use of join costs based on F0 and formant distance between neighboring units. But such diphone synthesis models were not actually implemented until decades later (Dixon and Maxey 1968, Olive 1977). The 1980s and 1990s saw the invention ofunit selection synthesis, based on larger units of non-uniform length and the use of a target cost, (Sagisaka 1988, Sagisaka et al. 1992, Hunt and Black 1996, Black and Taylor 1994, Syrdal et al. 2000). A third paradigm, articulatory synthesizers attempt to synthesize speech by modeling the physics of the vocal tract as an open tube. Representative models include Stevens et al. (1953), Flanagan et al. (1975), and Fant (1986). See Klatt (1975) and Flanagan (1972) for more details. Most early TTS systems used phonemes as input; development of the text analysis components of TTS came somewhat later, drawing on NLP. Indeed the ﬁrst true text-to-speech system seems to have been the system of Umeda and Teranishi (Umeda et al. 1968, Teranishi and Umeda 1968, Umeda 1976), which included a parser that assigned prosodic boundaries, as well as accent and stress. History of codecs and modern history of neural TTS TBD. Exercises Exercises 15 Allen, J., M. S. Hunnicut, and D. H. Klatt. 1987. From Text to Speech: The MITalk system . Cambridge University Press. Ardila, R., M. Branson, K. Davis, M. Kohler, J. Meyer, M. Henretty, R. Morais, L. Saunders, F. Tyers, and G. Weber. 2020. Common voice: A massively-multilingual speech corpus. LREC. Black, A. W. and P. Taylor. 1994. CHATR: A generic speech synthesis system. COLING. Chen, S., C. Wang, Y . Wu, Z. Zhang, L. Zhou, S. Liu, Z. Chen, Y . Liu, H. Wang, J. Li, L. He, S. Zhao, and F. Wei. 2025. Neural codec language models are zeroshot text to speech synthesizers. IEEE Trans. on TASLP, 33:705–718. Cooper, F. S., A. M. Liberman, and J. M. Borst. 1951. The interconversion of audible and visible patterns as a basis for research in the perception of speech. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 37(5):318–325. D´efossez, A., J. Copet, G. Synnaeve, and Y . Adi. 2023. High ﬁdelity neural audio compression. TMLR. Dixon, N. and H. Maxey. 1968. Terminal analog synthesis of continuous speech using the diphone method of segment assembly. IEEE Transactions on Audio and Electroacoustics, 16(1):40–50. Fant, G. M. 1951. Speech communication research. Ing. V etenskaps Akad. Stockholm, Sweden, 24:331–337. Fant, G. M. 1986. Glottal ﬂow: Models and interaction. Journal of Phonetics, 14:393–399. Flanagan, J. L. 1972. Speech Analysis, Synthesis, and Perception. Springer. Flanagan, J. L., K. Ishizaka, and K. L. Shipley. 1975. Synthesis of speech from a dynamic model of the vocal cords and vocal tract. The Bell System Technical Journal, 54(3):485–506. Gemmeke, J. F., D. P. Ellis, D. Freedman, A. Jansen, W. Lawrence, R. C. Moore, M. Plakal, and M. Ritter. 2017. Audio Set: An ontology and human-labeled dataset for audio events. ICASSP. Gray, R. M. 1984. Vector quantization. IEEE Transactions on ASSP, ASSP-1(2):4–29. Harris, C. M. 1953. A study of the building blocks in speech. JASA, 25(5):962–969. Hunt, A. J. and A. W. Black. 1996. Unit selection in a concatenative speech synthesis system using a large speech database. ICASSP. Klatt, D. H. 1975. V oice onset time, friction, and aspiration in word-initial consonant clusters. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 18:686–706. Klatt, D. H. 1982. The Klattalk text-to-speech conversion system. ICASSP. Lawrence, W. 1953. The synthesis of speech from signals which have a low information rate. In W. Jackson, ed., Communication Theory, 460–469. Butterworth. Mousavi, P., G. Maimon, A. Moumen, D. Petermann, J. Shi, H. Wu, H. Yang, A. Kuznetsova, A. Ploujnikov, R. Marxer, B. Ramabhadran, B. Elizalde, L. Lugosch, J. Li, C. Subakan, P. Woodland, M. Kim, H. yi Lee, S. Watanabe, Y . Adi, and M. Ravanelli. 2025. Discrete audio tokens: More than a survey! ArXiv preprint. Olive, J. P. 1977. Rule synthesis of speech from dyadic units. ICASSP77. Peterson, G. E., W. S.-Y . Wang, and E. Sivertsen. 1958. Segmentation techniques in speech synthesis. JASA, 30(8):739–742. Sagisaka, Y . 1988. Speech synthesis by rule using an optimal selection of non-uniform synthesis units. ICASSP. Sagisaka, Y ., N. Kaiki, N. Iwahashi, and K. Mimura. 1992. Atr – ν-talk speech synthesis system. ICSLP. Stevens, K. N., S. Kasowski, and G. M. Fant. 1953. An electrical analog of the vocal tract. JASA, 25(4):734–742. Syrdal, A. K., C. W. Wightman, A. Conkie, Y . Stylianou, M. Beutnagel, J. Schroeter, V . Strom, and K.-S. Lee. 2000. Corpus-based techniques in the AT&T NEXTGEN synthesis system. ICSLP. Teranishi, R. and N. Umeda. 1968. Use of pronouncing dictionary in speech synthesis experiments.6th International Congress on Acoustics. Umeda, N. 1976. Linguistic rules for text-to-speech synthesis. Proceedings of the IEEE, 64(4):443–451. Umeda, N., E. Matui, T. Suzuki, and H. Omura. 1968. Synthesis of fairy tale using an analog vocal tract. 6th International Congress on Acoustics. Van Den Oord, A., O. Vinyals, and K. Kavukcuoglu. 2017. Neural discrete representation learning. NeurIPS.