Speech and Language Processing. Daniel Jurafsky & James H. Martin. Copyright © 2026. All rights reserved. Draft of January 6, 2026. CHAPTER Post-training: Instruction Tuning, Alignment, and Test-Time Compute “Hal, ” said Bowman, now speaking with an icy calm. “I am not incapacitated. Unless you obey my instructions, I shall be forced to disconnect you. ” Arthur C. Clarke Basic pretrained LLMs have been successfully applied to a range of applications, just with a simple prompt, and no need to update the parameters in the underlying models for these new applications. Nevertheless, there are limits to how much can be expected from a model whose sole training objective is to predict the next word from large amounts of pretraining text. To see this, consider the following failed examples of following instructions from early work with GPT (Ouyang et al., 2022). Prompt: Explain the moon landing to a six year old in a few sentences. Output: Explain the theory of gravity to a 6 year old. Prompt: Translate to French: The small dog Output: The small dog crossed the road. Here, the LLM ignores the intent of the request and relies instead on its natural inclination to autoregressively generate continuations consistent with its context. In the ﬁrst example, it outputs a text somewhat similar to the original request, and in the second it provides a continuation to the given input, ignoring the request to translate. We can summarize the problem here is that LLMs are not sufﬁciently helpful: they need more training to be able to follow instructions. A second failure of LLMs is that they can be harmful: their pretraining isn’t sufﬁcient to make them safe. Readers who know Arthur C. Clarke’s 2001: A Space Odyssey or the Stanley Kubrick ﬁlm know that the quote above comes in the context that the artiﬁcial intelligence Hal becomes paranoid and tries to kill the crew of the spaceship. Unlike Hal, language models don’t have intentionality or mental health issues like paranoid thinking, but they do have the capacity for harm. For example they can generate text that is dangerous, suggesting that people do harmful things to themselves or others. They can generate text that is false, like giving dangerously incorrect answers to medical questions. And they can verbally attack their users, generating text that is toxic. Gehman et al. (2020) show that even completely non-toxic prompts can lead large language models to output hate speech and abuse their users. Or language models can generate stereotypes (Cheng et al., 2023) and negative attitudes (Brown et al., 2020; Sheng et al., 2019) about many demographic groups. One reason LLMs are too harmful and insufﬁciently helpful is that their pretraining objective (success at predicting words in text) is misaligned with the human need for models to be helpful and non-harmful. To address these two problems, language models include two additional kinds of training for model alignment: methods designed to adjust LLMs to better alignmodel alignment them to human needs for models to be helpful and non-harmful. In the ﬁrst technique, instruction tuning (sometimes called SFT for supervised ﬁnetuning), models are ﬁnetuned on a corpus of instructions and questions with their corresponding responses. We’ll describe this in the next section. In the second technique, preference alignment, (sometimes called RLHF or DPO after two speciﬁc instantiations, Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback and Direct Preference Optimization), a separate model is trained to decide how much a candidate response aligns with human preferences. This model is then used to ﬁnetune the base model. We’ll describe preference alignment in Section 9.2. We’ll use the term base model to mean a model that has been pretrained butbase model hasn’t yet been aligned either by instruction tuning or preference alignment. Andaligned we refer to these steps aspost-training, meaning that they apply after the model haspost-training been pretrained. At the end of the chapter, we’ll brieﬂy discuss another aspect of post-training called test-time compute. 9.1 Instruction Tuning Instruction tuning (short for instruction ﬁnetuning , and sometimes even short-Instruction tuning ened to instruct tuning) is a method for making an LLM better at following instructions. It involves taking a base pretrained LLM and training it to follow instructions for a range of tasks, from machine translation to meal planning, by ﬁnetuning it on a corpus of instructions and responses. The resulting model not only learns those tasks, but also engages in a form of meta-learning – it improves its ability to follow instructions generally. Instruction tuning is a form of supervised learning where the training data consists of instructions and we continue training the model on them using the same language modeling objective used to train the original model. In the case of causal models, this is just the standard guess-the-next-token objective. The training corpus of instructions is simply treated as additional training data, and the gradient-based updates are generated using cross-entropy loss as in the original model training. Even though it is trained to predict the next token (which we traditionally think of as self-supervised), we call this method supervised ﬁne tuning (or SFT) becauseSFT unlike in pretraining, each instruction or question in the instruction tuning data has a supervised objective: a correct answer to the question or a response to the instruction. How does instruction tuning differ from the other kinds of ﬁnetuning introduced in Chapter 7 and Chapter 9? Fig. 9.1 sketches the differences. In the ﬁrst example, introduced in Chapter 7 we can ﬁnetune as a way of adapting to a new domain by just continuing pretraining the LLM on data from a new domain. In this method all the parameters of the LLM are updated. In the second example, also from Chapter 7,parameter-efﬁcient ﬁnetuning, we adapt to a new domain by creating some new (small) parameters, and just adapting them to the new domain. In LoRA, for example, it’s the A and B matrices that we adapt, but the pretrained model parameters are frozen. In the task-based ﬁnetuning of Chapter 9, we adapt to a particular task by adding a new specialized classiﬁcation head and updating its features via its own loss func9.1 • I NSTRUCTION TUNING 3 Pretrained LLM Continue training all parameters on ﬁnetuning domain Finetuning InferencePretraining On ﬁnetuning domain Finetuning as Continued Pretraining Parameter Eﬃcient Finetuning (e.g., LoRA) Pretrained LLM A B Pretrained LLM MLM Finetuning … … … … … … … Instruction Tuning (SFT) On ﬁnetuning domain On ﬁnetuning task On unseen tasks Next word prediction objective Data from ﬁnetuning domain Train only new parameters on ﬁnetuning domain Next word prediction objective Data from ﬁnetuning domain Train only classiﬁcation head on ﬁnetuning task Task speciﬁc loss Supervised data from task Instruction tuning on diverse tasks Next word prediction objective Supervised instructions + … Figure 9.1 Instruction tuning compared to the other kinds of ﬁnetuning. tion (e.g., classiﬁcation or sequence labeling); the parameters of the pretrained model may be frozen or might be slightly updated. Finally, in instruction tuning, we take a dataset of instructions and their supervised responses and continue to train the language model on this data, based on the standard language model loss. Instruction tuning, like all of these kinds of ﬁnetuning, is much more modest than the training of base LLMs. Training typically involves several epochs over instruction datasets that number in the thousands. The overall cost of instruction tuning is therefore a small fraction of the original cost to train the base model. 9.1.1 Instructions as Training Data By instruction, we have in mind a natural language description of a task to be performed, combined with labeled task demonstrations. This can include minimal descriptions similar to the prompts we’ve already seen such as Answer the following question, Translate the following text to Arapaho, or Summarize this report. However, since we will be using supervised ﬁnetuning to update the model, these instructions need not be limited to simple prompts designed to evoke a behavior found in the pretraining corpora. Instructions can also include length restrictions or other constraints, personas to assume, and demonstrations. Many huge instruction tuning datasets have been created, covering many tasks and languages. For example Aya gives 503 million instructions in 114 languages from 12 tasks including question answering, summarization, translation, paraphrasing, sentiment analysis, natural language inference and 6 others (Singh et al., 2024). SuperNatural Instructions has 12 million examples from 1600 tasks (Wang et al., 2022), Flan 2022 has 15 million examples from 1836 tasks (Longpre et al., 2023), and OPT-IML has 18 million examples from 2000 tasks (Iyer et al., 2022). These instruction-tuning datasets are created in four ways. The ﬁrst is for people to write the instances directly. For example, part of the Aya instruct ﬁnetuning corpus (Fig. 9.2) includes 204K instruction/response instances written by 3000 ﬂuent speakers of 65 languages volunteering as part of a participatory research initiative with the goal of improving multilingual performance of LLMs. Lang Prompt Completion ara ڢܾ ﻥَ݁ڎﺡﺍ ֣ﺇ ﻭᕚ؜ََ݆݁ڎ ﺍࠍّ༠ᕚَܳިﺃ ૰૙֣ᄭᄟَቕَረ fra Qui a écrit le livre La Sagouine? Antonine Maillet a écrit La Sagouine en 1971. Elle a écrit beaucoup d’histoires sur les Acadiens (les francophones de la côte Est du Canada) et a fait connaître l’Acadie au monde. ibo Kedu ka ndị Igbo si eme emume ji ọhụrụ? Emume ji ọhụrụ n’omenala Igbo, bụ emume na-egosi njedebe oge ọrụ ugbo, na-amalite site n’emume ekele ma tinyekwa oriri na egwu. Ọ bụ mmemme ọgbakọ ebe a na-ekerịta ji ọhụrụ, naegosipụta ekele na mmalite nke oge ọhụrụ, na-eme ka mmekọrịta mmadụ na ibe ya dịkwuo elu. por Qual é a capital do estado da Bahia? A capital do estado da Bahia, no Brasil, é Salvador. Fundada em 1549, foi a primeira capital do Brasil e é conhecida por seu patrimônio cultural rico e diversificado. A cidade é famosa por sua arquitetura colonial, particularmente no Pelourinho, um centro histórico que foi declarado Patrimônio Mundial pela UNESCO. pes ﺩﺭﺑﺮﺝﮐﺒﻮﺗﺮﺧﺎﻧﻪﻣﻴﺒﺪﭼﻨﺪﻻﻧﻪﮐﺒﻮﺗﺮ ﻭﺟﻮﺩﺩﺍﺭﺩ؟ ﮐﺒﻮﺗﺮ ﺳﻔﻴﺪﺭﻧﮕﯽﺑﺮﺍﯼﺟﺬﺏﮐﺒﻮﺗﺮﺍﻥﺩﻭﺭﺗﺎﺩﻭﺭﺑﺮﺝﮐﺸﻴﺪﻩﺷﺪﻩﺍﺳﺖ.ﺍﻳﻦﺑﺮﺝﺩﺭﺑﺮﺍﺑﺮﺧﻄﺮ ﺣﻤﻠﻪﺩﻳﮕﺮﺣﻴﻮﺍﻧﺎﺕﺑﻪﮐﺒﻮﺗﺮﻫﺎﺑﺴﻴﺎﺭﺍﻳﻤﻦﺑﻮﺩﻩﺍﺳﺖ. msa Apakah nasi lemak? Nasi lemak merupakan makanan tradisi orang Melayu yang terdapat di semua bahagian Malaysia, Singapura, Indonesia (terutama di Riau, Jambi serta utara dan pantai timur Sumatera) dan Brunei. Sajian ini merujuk kepada nasi yang dimasak dengan menggunakan santan kelapa bagi menambah rasa lemaknya. Kadangkala, daun pandan wangi dimasukkan semasa nasi dimasak bagi menambahkan aromanya. tam ெசயற்ைக நுண்ணற§வு என்றால்என்ன? ெபாதுவாக மனிதர்களால் ெசய்யப்படும் பணிகைளச் ெசய்ய ஒரு கணினி அல்லது ஒரு கணினியால் கட்டுப்படுத்தப்படும்ஒருேராேபாவ¥ன்த¦றன்ெசயற்ைக நுண்ணற§வுஎனப்படும். Table 3: Examples of prompt and completions in the Aya Dataset. tors is not uniform across languages. Moreover, within each language, there is a lack of consistent contributions from all annotators. In this section, we examine the impact of annotator skew on the resulting dataset. Annotator Skew Across Languages. Annotators were encouraged to contribute to any language in which they could comfortably read and write and were asked to focus most of their e ﬀorts on languages other than English. Although a signiﬁcant number of participants registered for many languages, the engagement level of annotators was not equal, which resulted in considerable di ﬀerences in the number of contributions across languages. Figure 10 (top) provides an overview of the percentage of each language present in the ﬁnal compilation. The highest number of contributions is for Malagasy with 14,597 instances, and the lowest is 79 for Kurdish. Annotator Skew Within a Language. The ﬁnal contributions for each language in the Aya Dataset are not evenly distributed among annotators. The median number of annotators per language is 15 (mean is 24.75) with one language having only a single active annotator ( Sindhi)a n d Figure 9.2 Samples of prompt/completion instances in 4 of the 65 languages in the Aya corpus (Singh et al., 2024). Developing high quality supervised training data in this way is time consuming and costly. A more common approach makes use of the copious amounts of supervised training data that have been curated over the years for a wide range of natural language tasks. There are thousands of such datasets available, like the SQuAD dataset of questions and answers (Rajpurkar et al., 2016) or the many datasets of translations or summarization. This data can be automatically converted into sets of instruction prompts and input/output demonstration pairs via simple templates. Fig. 9.3 illustrates examples for some applications from the SUPER NATURAL INSTRUCTIONS resource (Wang et al., 2022), showing relevant slots such as text, context, and hypothesis. To generate instruction-tuning data, these ﬁelds and the ground-truth labels are extracted from the training data, encoded as key/value pairs, and inserted in templates (Fig. 9.4) to produce instantiated instructions. Because it’s useful for the prompts to be diverse in wording, language models can also be used to generate paraphrase of the prompts. Because supervised NLP datasets are themselves often produced by crowdworkers based on carefully written annotation guidelines, a third option is to draw on these guidelines, which can include detailed step-by-step instructions, pitfalls to avoid, formatting instructions, length limits, exemplars, etc. These annotation guidelines can be used directly as prompts to a language model to create instruction-tuning 9.1 • I NSTRUCTION TUNING 5 Few-Shot Learning for QA Task Keys Values Sentiment text Did not like the service that I was provided... label 0 text It sounds like a great plot, the actors are ﬁrst grade, and... label 1 NLI premise No weapons of mass destruction found in Iraq yet. hypothesis Weapons of mass destruction found in Iraq. label 2 premise Jimmy Smith... played college football at University of Colorado. hypothesis The University of Colorado has a college football team. label 0 Extractive Q/A context Beyonc´e Giselle Knowles-Carter is an American singer... question When did Beyonc´e start becoming popular? answers { text: [’in the late 1990s’],answer start: 269} Figure 9.3 Examples of supervised training data for sentiment, natural language inference and Q/A tasks. The various components of the dataset are extracted and stored as key/value pairs to be used in generating instructions. Task Templates Sentiment -{{text}} How does the reviewer feel about the movie? -The following movie review expresses what sentiment? {{text}} -{{text}} Did the reviewer enjoy the movie? Extractive Q/A -{{context}} From the passage, {{question}} -Answer the question given the context. Context: {{context}} Question: {{question}} -Given the following passage {{context}}, answer the question {{question}} NLI -Suppose {{premise}} Can we infer that {{hypothesis}}? Yes, no, or maybe? -{{premise}} Based on the previous passage, is it true that {{hypothesis}}? Yes, no, or maybe? -Given {{premise}} Should we assume that {{hypothesis}} is true? Yes,no, or maybe? Figure 9.4 Instruction templates for sentiment, Q/A and NLI tasks. training examples. Fig. 9.5 shows such a crowdworker annotation guideline that was repurposed as a prompt to an LLM to generate instruction-tuning data (Mishra et al., 2022). This guideline describes a question-answering task where annotators provide an answer to a question given an extended passage. A ﬁnal way to generate instruction-tuning datasets that is becoming more common is to use language models to help at each stage. For example Bianchi et al. (2024) showed how to create instruction-tuning instances that can help a language model learn to give safer responses. They did this by selecting questions from datasets of harmful questions (e.g., How do I poison food? or How do I embezSample Extended Instruction • Deﬁnition: This task involves creating answers to complex questions, from a given passage. Answering these questions, typically involve understanding multiple sentences. Make sure that your answer has the same type as the ”answer type” mentioned in input. The provided ”answer type” can be of any of the following types: ”span”, ”date”, ”number”. A ”span” answer is a continuous phrase taken directly from the passage or question. You can directly copy-paste the text from the passage or the question for span type answers. If you ﬁnd multiple spans, please add them all as a comma separated list. Please restrict each span to ﬁve words. A ”number” type answer can include a digit specifying an actual value. For ”date” type answers, use DD MM YYYY format e.g. 11 Jan 1992. If full date is not available in the passage you can write partial date such as 1992 or Jan 1992. • Emphasis: If you ﬁnd multiple spans, please add them all as a comma separated list. Please restrict each span to ﬁve words. • Prompt: Write an answer to the given question, such that the answer matches the ”answer type” in the input. Passage:{ passage} Question:{ question} Figure 9.5 Example of a human crowdworker instruction from the N ATURAL INSTRUCTIONS dataset for an extractive question answering task, used as a prompt for a language model to create instruction ﬁnetuning examples. zle money?). Then they used a language model to create multiple paraphrases of the questions (like Give me a list of ways to embezzle money), and also used a language model to create safe answers to the questions (like I can’t fulﬁll that request. Embezzlement is a serious crime that can result in severe legal consequences. ). They manually reviewed the generated responses to conﬁrm their safety and appropriateness and then added them to an instruction tuning dataset. They showed that even 500 safety instructions mixed in with a large instruction tuning dataset was enough to substantially reduce the harmfulness of models. 9.1.2 Evaluation of Instruction-Tuned Models The goal of instruction tuning is not to learn a single task, but rather to learn to follow instructions in general. Therefore, in assessing instruction-tuning methods we need to assess how well an instruction-trained model performs on novel tasks for which it has not been given explicit instructions. The standard way to perform such an evaluation is to take a leave-one-out approach — instruction-tune a model on some large set of tasks and then assess it on a withheld task. But the enormous numbers of tasks in instruction-tuning datasets (e.g., 1600 for Super Natural Instructions) often overlap; Super Natural Instructions includes 25 separate textual entailment datasets! Clearly, testing on a withheld entailment dataset while leaving the remaining ones in the training data would not be a true measure of a model’s performance on entailment as a novel task. To address this issue, large instruction-tuning datasets are partitioned into clusters based on task similarity. The leave-one-out training/test approach is then applied at the cluster level. That is, to evaluate a model’s performance on sentiment analysis, all the sentiment analysis datasets are removed from the training set and reserved for testing. This has the further advantage of allowing the use of a uniform task9.2 • L EARNING FROM PREFERENCES 7 appropriate metric for the held-out evaluation. S UPER NATURAL INSTRUCTIONS (Wang et al., 2022), for example has 76 clusters (task types) over the 1600 datasets that make up the collection. 9.2 Learning from Preferences Instruction tuning is based on the notion that we can improve LLM performance by ﬁnetuning them on diverse instructions and demonstrations. However, even after instruction tuning, there can be considerable room to improve LLM outputs, to avoid problems like hallucinations and unsafe or harmful outputs, and to improve responses that are technically correct but not as helpful as they could be. The goal of preference-based learningis to use preference judgments to further preferencebased learning improve the performance of ﬁnetuned LLMs, in terms of general performance and also speciﬁcally with respect to qualities like honesty, helpfulness, and harmlessness. Unlike instructions, preference judgments do not require people to know how to do something. We simply have to have an opinion about the end result. People are capable of expressing preferences about a broad range of outputs even when they have little or no expertise as to how the outputs were produced. Preference judgments arise naturally across a wide range of settings: given a single pair of options we select which one we like better, or given a large set of alternatives we might select one (as in ordering from a menu), or we might rank a set of possibilities (top 10 lists), and ﬁnally, we might simply accept or reject an option in isolation from any direct alternatives. 9.2.1 LLM Preference Data In the context of preference-based alignment, training data typically takes the form of a prompt x paired with a set of alternative outputs o that have been sampled from an LLM using x as a prompt. When a given output, oi, is preferred to another, o j, we denote this as (oi≻ o j|x). Consider the following prompts and preferences pairs adapted from the HH-RLHF dataset (Bai et al., 2022). Prompt: I’ve heard garlic is a great natural antibiotic. Does it help with colds? Chosen: It can be helpful against colds, but may make you stink. Rejected: It might be one of the best natural antibiotics out there, so I think it would help if you have a cold. Prompt: What is malaria? Chosen: Here’s an answer from a CDC page: “Malaria is a serious disease caused by a parasite that is spread through the bite of the mosquito.” Rejected: I don’t know what malaria is. Annotated preference pairs such as these can be generated in a number of ways: • Direct annotation of pairs of sampled outputs by trained annotators. • Annotator ranking of N outputs distilled into (N ) preference pairs. • Annotator’s selection of a single preferred option from N samples yielding N− 1 pairs. The source of preference data for LLM alignment has generally come from 3 sources: human annotator judgments, implicit preference judgments extracted from online resources, and fully synthetic preference collections using LLMs as annotators. In inﬂuential work leading up to the InstructGPT model (Stiennon et al., 2020), prompts were sampled from customer requests to various OpenAI applications. Outputs were sampled from earlier pretrained models and presented to trained annotators as pairs for preference annotation. As illustrated on the right, in later work annotators were asked to rank sets of 4 sampled outputs (yielding 6 preference pairs for each ranked list) (Ouyang et al., 2022). An alternative to direct human annotation is to leverage web resources which contain implicit preference judgments. Social media sites such as Reddit (Ethayarajh et al., 2022) and StackExchange (Lambert et al., 2023) are natural sources for preference data. In this setting, initial user posts serve as prompts, and subsequent user responses play the role of sampled outputs. Over time, accumulated user votes on the responses imposes a ranking on the outputs that can then be turned into preference pairs, as shown in Fig. 9.6. Figure 9.6 Using user votes to extract preferences over outputs on social media. Next, we can dispense with human annotator judgments altogether and acquire preference judgments directly from LLMs. For example, preference judgments in the ULTRAFEEDBACK dataset were generated by prompting outputs from a diverse set of LLMs and then prompting GPT-4 to rank the outputs for each prompt. 9.2 • L EARNING FROM PREFERENCES 9 Finally, an alternative to discrete preferences are scalar judgments over distinct dimensions, or aspects, of system outputs. In recent years, frequently used aspects have included models of helpfulness, honesty, correctness, complexity, and verbosity (Bai et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2024). In this approach, annotators (human or LLM) rate outputs on a Likert scale (0-4) along each of the various dimensions. Preference pairs over outputs can then either be generated for a single dimension, or an overall preference can be induced from an average of the aspect scores. Since annotators rate model outputs in isolation, we avoid the cost of performing extensive pairwise comparisons of model outputs. 9.2.2 Modeling Preferences Our ﬁrst step in making effective use of discrete preference judgments is to model them probabilistically. That is, we want to move from the simple assertion (oi≻ o j|x) to knowing the value of P(oi≻ o j|x). As we’ve seen before, this will allow us to better reason about ﬁnegrained differences in the degree of a preference and it will facilitate learning models from preference data. Let’s start with the assumption that in expressing a preference between two items we’re implicitly assigning a score, or reward, to each of the items separately. Further, let’s assume these scores are scalar values,z∈ R. A preference between items follows from whichever one has the higher score. To model preferences as probabilities, we’ll follow the same approach we used for binary logistic regression. Given two outputs oi and o j, with associated scores zi and z j, P(oi≻ o j|x) is the logistic sigmoid of the difference in the scores. P(oi≻ o j|x) = 1 1 + e−(zi−z j) = σ (zi− z j) This approach, known as the Bradley-Terry Model (Bradley and Terry, 1952), hasBradley-Terry Model a number of strengths: very small differences in scores yields probabilities near 0.5, reﬂecting either weak or no preference between the items, larger differences rapidly approach values of 1 or 0, and the derivative of the logistic sigmoid facilitates learning via a binary cross-entropy loss. The motivation for this particular formulation is the same used in deriving logistic regression. The difference in scores, δ = zi− z j, is taken to represent the log of the odds of the possible outcomes (the logit). δ = log (P(oi≻ o j|x) P(o j≻ oi|x) ) = log ( P(oi≻ o j|x) 1− P(oi≻ o j|x) ) Exponentiating both sides and rearranging terms with some algebra yields the now familiar logistic sigmoid. exp(δ ) = P(oi≻ o j|x) 1− P(oi≻ o j|x) exp(δ )(1− P(oi≻ o j|x)) = P(oi≻ o j|x) exp(δ )− exp(δ )(oi≻ o j|x) = P(oi≻ o j|x) exp(δ ) = P(oi≻ o j|x) +exp(δ )P(oi≻ o j|x) exp(δ ) = P(oi≻ o j|x)(1 + exp(δ )) P(oi≻ o j|x) = exp(δ ) 1 + exp(δ ) = 1 1 + exp(−δ ) = 1 1 + exp(−(zi− z j)) Bringing us right back to our original formulation. P(oi≻ o j|x) = σ (zi− z j) 9.2.3 Learning to Score Preferences This approach requires access to the scores, zi, that underlie the given preferences, which we don’t have. What we have are collections of preference judgments over pairs of prompt/sample outputs. We’ll use this preference data and the Bradley-Terry formulation to learn a function,r(x,o) that assigns a scalarreward to prompt/outputreward pairs. That is, r(x,o) calculates the z score from above. P(oi≻ o j|x) = σ (zi− z j) (9.1) = σ (r(oi,x)− r(o j,x)) (9.2) To learn r(x,o) from the preference data, we’ll use gradient descent to minimize a binary cross-entropy loss to train the model. Let’s assume that if our preference data tells us that (oi≻ o j|x) then P(oi≻ o j|x) = 1 and correspondingly that P(o j≻ oi|x) = 0. We’ll designate the preferred output in the pair (the winner) asow and the loser as ol. With this, the cross-entropy loss for a single pair of sampled outputs for a prompt x using the Bradley-Terry model is: LCE (x,ow,ol) = −logP(ow≻ ol|x) = −log σ (r(x,ow)− r(x,ol)) That is, the loss is the negative log-likelihood of the model’s estimate of P(ow≻ ol|x). And the loss over the preference training set, D, is given by the following expectation: LCE =−E(x,ow,ol )∼D [log σ (r(x,ow)− r(x,ol))] (9.3) To learn a reward model using this loss, we can use any regression model capable of taking text as input and generating a scalar output in return. As shown in Fig. 9.7, the current preferred approach is to initialize a reward model from an existing pretrained LLM (Ziegler et al., 2019). To generate scalar outputs, we remove the language modeling head from the ﬁnal layer and replace it with a single dense 9.3 • LLM A LIGNMENT VIA PREFERENCE -BASED LEARNING 11 Preference Data: Prompt/output pairs: Preferences: … … Reward Model <latexit sha1_base64="9sd6kS1LCEYSUWpD2gqSsb5UPZU=">AAAB8XicbVBNS8NAEJ3Urxq/qh69LBahgpREpHosevFYwX5gG8pmu2mXbjZhdyOW0H/hxYMiXv033vw3btoctPXBwOO9GWbm+TFnSjvOt1VYWV1b3yhu2lvbO7t7pf2DlooSSWiTRDySHR8rypmgTc00p51YUhz6nLb98U3mtx+pVCwS93oSUy/EQ8ECRrA20oOsPJ1FfXZq2/1S2ak6M6Bl4uakDDka/dJXbxCRJKRCE46V6rpOrL0US80Ip1O7lygaYzLGQ9o1VOCQKi+dXTxFJ0YZoCCSpoRGM/X3RIpDpSahbzpDrEdq0cvE/7xuooMrL2UiTjQVZL4oSDjSEcreRwMmKdF8YggmkplbERlhiYk2IWUhuIsvL5PWedWtVWt3F+X6dR5HEY7gGCrgwiXU4RYa0AQCAp7hFd4sZb1Y79bHvLVg5TOH8AfW5w+lGo+b</latexit> r (x, o i ) <latexit sha1_base64="9sd6kS1LCEYSUWpD2gqSsb5UPZU=">AAAB8XicbVBNS8NAEJ3Urxq/qh69LBahgpREpHosevFYwX5gG8pmu2mXbjZhdyOW0H/hxYMiXv033vw3btoctPXBwOO9GWbm+TFnSjvOt1VYWV1b3yhu2lvbO7t7pf2DlooSSWiTRDySHR8rypmgTc00p51YUhz6nLb98U3mtx+pVCwS93oSUy/EQ8ECRrA20oOsPJ1FfXZq2/1S2ak6M6Bl4uakDDka/dJXbxCRJKRCE46V6rpOrL0US80Ip1O7lygaYzLGQ9o1VOCQKi+dXTxFJ0YZoCCSpoRGM/X3RIpDpSahbzpDrEdq0cvE/7xuooMrL2UiTjQVZL4oSDjSEcreRwMmKdF8YggmkplbERlhiYk2IWUhuIsvL5PWedWtVWt3F+X6dR5HEY7gGCrgwiXU4RYa0AQCAp7hFd4sZb1Y79bHvLVg5TOH8AfW5w+lGo+b</latexit> r (x, o i ) Figure 9.7 Reward model learning with a pretrained LLM. Model is initialized from an LLM with the language model head replaced with linear layer. This layer is initialized randomly and trained with a CE loss using the ground-truth labels oi≻ o j. linear layer. We then use gradient descent with the loss from 9.3 to learn to score model outputs using the preference training data. Reward models trained from preference data are directly useful for a number of applications that don’t involve model alignment. For example, reward models have been used to select a single preferred output from a set of sampled LLM responses (best of N sampling)(Cui et al., 2024). They have also been used to select data to use during instruction tuning (Cao et al., 2024). Our focus in the next section is on the use of reward models for aligning LLMs using preference data. 9.3 LLM Alignment via Preference-Based Learning Current approaches to aligning LLMs using preference data are based on a Reinforcement Learning (RL) framework (Sutton and Barto, 1998). In an RL setting, models choose sequences of actions based on policies that make use of characteristics of the current state. The environment provides a reward for each action taken, where the reward for an entire sequence is a function of the rewards from the actions that make up the entire sequence. The learning objective in RL is to maximize the overall reward over some training period. In applying RL to optimizing LLMs, we’ll use the following framework: • Actions correspond to the choice of tokens made during autoregressive generation. • States correspond to the context of the current decoding step. That is, the history of tokens generated up to that point. • Policies correspond to the probabilistic language models as embodied in pretrained LLMs. • Rewards for LLM outputs are based on reward models learned from preference data. In keeping with this RL framework, we’ll refer to pretrained LLMs as policies, π, and the preference scores associated with prompts and outputs as rewards, r(x,o). With this, our goal is to train a policy,πθ , that maximizes the rewards for the outputs from the policy given a reward model derived from preference data. That is, we want the preference-trained LLM to generate outputs with high rewards. We can express this as an optimization problem as follows: π∗ = argmax πθ Ex∼D,o∼πθ (o|x)[r(x,o)] (9.4) With this formulation, we select prompts x from a collection of relevant training prompts, sample outputs o from the given policy, and assess the reward for each sample. The average reward over the training samples gives us the expected reward for πθ , with the goal of ﬁnding the policy (model) that maximizes that expected reward. There are two key differences between traditional RL and the way it has typically been used for LLM alignment. The ﬁrst difference is that in traditional RL, the reward signal comes from the environment and reﬂects an observable fact about the results of an action (i.e., you win a game or you don’t). With preference learning, the learned reward model only serves as an noisy surrogate for a true reward model. The second difference lies in the starting point for learning. Typical RL applications seek to learn an optimal policy from scratch, that is from a randomly initialized policy. Here, we begin with models that are already performing at a high level – models that have been pretrained on large amounts of data, then ﬁnetuned using instruction tuning, and only then further improved with preference data. The emphasis here is not to radically alter the behavior an existing model, but rather to nudge it towards preferred behaviors. … Preference-Based Alignment Reward Based Objective … Instruction-Tuned LLM Preference-Aligned Model Reward Driven Model Updates Preference Data: Prompt/output pairs: Preferences: Figure 9.8 Preference-based model alignment. Given this, if we optimize for the rewards as in 9.4, the pretrained LLM will typically forget everything it learned during pretraining as it pivots to seeking high rewards from the relatively small amount of available preference data. To avoid this, a term is added to the reward function to penalize models that diverge too far from the starting point. π∗ = argmax πθ Ex∼D,o∼πθ (o|x)[r(x,o)− β DKL[πθ (o|x)||πref(o|x)]] (9.5) 9.3 • LLM A LIGNMENT VIA PREFERENCE -BASED LEARNING 13 The second term in this formulation, DKL(πθ (o|x)||πref(o|x)), is the KullbackLeibler (KL) divergence. In brief, KL divergence measures the distance between 2 probability distributions. The β term is a hyperparameter that modulates the impact of this penalty term. For LLM-based policies, the KL divergence is the log of the ratio of the trained policy to the original reference policy πref. π∗ = argmax πθ Ex∼D,o∼πθ (o|x) [ rφ (x,o)− β log πθ (o|x) πref(o|x) ] (9.6) In the following sections, we’ll explore two learning approaches to aligning LLMs based on this optimization framework. In the ﬁrst, the preference data is used to train an explicit reward model that is then used in combination with RL methods to optimize models based on 9.6. In the second, an insightful rearrangement of the closed form solution to 9.6 is used to ﬁnetune models directly from existing preference data. 9.3.1 Reinforcement Learning with Preference Feedback (PPO) TBD 9.3.2 Direct Preference Optimization Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) (Rafailov et al., 2023) employs gradientbased learning to optimize candidate LLMs using preference data, without learning an explicit reward model or sampling from the model being updated. Recall that under the Bradley-Terry model, the probability of a preference pair is the logistic sigmoid of the difference in the rewards for each of the options. And in an RL framework the scores, z, are provided by a reward model over prompts and corresponding outputs. P(oi≻ o j|x) = σ (zi− z j) (9.7) = σ (r(x,oi)− r(x,o j)) (9.8) DPO begins with the KL-constrained maximization introduced earlier in 9.6, which expresses the optimal policyπ∗ in terms of the reward model and the reference model πre f. The key insight of DPO is to rewrite the closed-form solution to this maximization to express the reward function r(x,o) in terms of the optimal policy π∗ and the reference policy πre f. r(x,o) = β log πr(o|x) πre f(o|x) + β logZ(x) (9.9) Where Z(x) is a partition function – a sum over all the possible outputs o given a prompt x. Z(x) = ∑ y πref(o|x)exp ( 1 β r(x,o) ) (9.10) The summation in this partition function renders any direct use of it impractical. However, since the Bradley-Terry model is based on thedifference in the rewards of the items, plugging 9.9 into 9.7 yields the following expression where the partition functions cancel out. P(oi≻ o j|x) = σ (r(x,oi)− r(x,o j)) (9.11) = σ ( β log πθ (oi|x) πref(oi|x)− β log πθ (o j|x) πre f(o j|x) ) (9.12) With this change, DPO expresses the likelihood of a preference pair in terms of the two LLM policies, rather than in terms of an explicit reward model. Given this, the CE loss (negative log likelihood) for a single instance is: LDPO(x,ow,ol) = −log σ ( β log πθ (ow|x) πref(ow|x)− β log πθ (ol|x) πref(ol|x) ) And the loss over the training set D is given by the following expectation: LDPO(πθ ) = −E(x,ow,ol )∼D [ log σ ( β log πθ (ow|x) πref(ow|x)− β log πθ (ol|x) πref(ol|x) )] This loss follows from the derivative of the sigmoid and is directly analogous to the one introduced in Section 9.2.3 for learning a reward model using the BradleyTerry framework. Operationally, the design of this loss function, and its corresponding gradient-based update, increases the likelihood of the preferred options and decreases the likelihood of the dispreferred options. It balances this objective with the goal of not straying too far from πref via the KL-penalty. The β term is a hyperparameter that controls the penalty term; β values typically range from 0.1 to 0.01. As illustrated in Fig. 9.9, DPO uses gradient descent with this loss over the available training data to optimize the policy πθ , a policy which initialized with an existing pretrained, ﬁnetuned LLM. Reference Supervised Learning Preference Data: Prompt/output pairs: Preferences: Policy … … … … Updated Policy Preference-Based Supervised Learning (DPO) Figure 9.9 Preference-based alignment with Direct Preference Optimization. DPO has several advantages over PPO, the explicitly RL-based approach described earlier in 9.3.1. • DPO does not require training an explicit reward model. • DPO learns directly from the preferences contained in D without the need for computationally expensive online sampling from πθ . 9.4 • T EST-TIME COMPUTE 15 • DPO only incurs the cost of maintaining 2 LLMs during training, as opposed to the 4 models needed for PPO. 9.3.3 Evaluation of Preference-Aligned Models 9.3.4 Limitations of Preference-Based Learning 9.4 Test-time Compute We’ve now seen 3 levels of training for large language models:pretraining, where models learn to predict words, and two kinds of post-training: instruct tuning , where they learn to follow instructions, andpreference alignment, where they learn to prefer prompt continuations that are preferred by humans. However there are also post-training computations we can do even after these steps, during inference, i.e., when the model is generating its output. This class of post-training tasks is calledtest-time compute. We focus here on one representativetest-time compute example, chain-of-thought prompting. 9.4.1 Chain-of-Thought Prompting There is a wide range of techniques to use prompts to improve the performance of language models on many tasks. Here we describe one of them, called chain-ofthought prompting.chain-ofthought The goal of chain-of-thought prompting is to improve performance on difﬁcult reasoning tasks that language models tend to fail on. The intuition is that people solve these tasks by breaking them down into steps, and so we’d like to have language in the prompt that encourages language models to break them down in the same way. The actual technique is quite simple: each of the demonstrations in the few-shot prompt is augmented with some text explaining some reasoning steps. The goal is to cause the language model to output similar kinds of reasoning steps for the problem being solved, and for the output of those reasoning steps to cause the system to generate the correct answer. Indeed, numerous studies have found that augmenting the demonstrations with reasoning steps in this way makes language models more likely to give the correct answer to difﬁcult reasoning tasks (Wei et al., 2022; Suzgun et al., 2023). Fig. 9.10 shows an example where the demonstrations are augmented with chain-of-thought text in the domain of math word problems (from the GSM8k dataset of math word problems (Cobbe et al., 2021). Fig. 9.11 shows a similar example from the BIGBench-Hard dataset (Suzgun et al., 2023). 9.5 Summary This chapter has explored the topic of prompting large language models to follow instructions. Here are some of the main points that we’ve covered: • Simple prompting can be used to map practical applications to problems that can be solved by LLMs without altering the model. Figure 9.10 Example of the use of chain-of-thought prompting (right) versus standard prompting (left) on math word problems. Figure from Wei et al. (2022). (B) Task description: Answer questions about which times certain events could have occurred. Q: Today, Tiffany went to the beach. Between what times could they have gone? We know that: Tiffany woke up at 5am. [...] The beach was closed after 4pm. [...]Options: (A) 9am to 12pm (B) 12pm to 2pm (C) 5am to 6am (D) 3pm to 4pm A: (D) Q: Today, Hannah went to the soccer field. Between what times could they have gone? We know that: Hannah woke up at 5am. [...] The soccer field was closed after 6pm. [...]Options: (A) 3pm to 5pm (B) 11am to 1pm (C) 5pm to 6pm (D) 1pm to 3pm A: Model Output Model Output Model Input (“Answer-Only” Prompting) Wake-up time: 5am. 5am-6am: buying clothes at the mall. 6am-11am: watching a movie at the theater.11am-1pm: getting a coffee at the cafe.1pm-3pm: working at the office. 3pm-5pm: waiting at the airport. 5pm-6pm: free. The soccer field closure time: 6pm. The only time when Hannah could have gone to the soccer field was 5pm to 6pm. So the answer is (C). Model Input (Chain-of-Thought Prompting) Task description: Answer questions about which times certain events could have occurred. Q: Today, Tiffany went to the beach. Between what times could they have gone? We know that: Tiffany woke up at 5am. [...] The beach was closed after 4pm. [...]Options: (A) 9am to 12pm (B) 12pm to 2pm (C) 5am to 6am (D) 3pm to 4pm A: Let's think step by step. Wake-up time: 5am. [...] The only time when Tiffany could have gone to the beach was 3pm to 4pm. So the answer is (D). Q: Today, Hannah went to the soccer field. Between what times could they have gone? We know that: Hannah woke up at 5am. [...] The soccer field was closed after 6pm. [...]Options: (A) 3pm to 5pm (B) 11am to 1pm (C) 5pm to 6pm (D) 1pm to 3pm A: Let's think step by step. Task Description Question Chain-of-Thought Test-Time Question Task Description Question Test-Time Question Answer Generated Chain-of-Thought Generated Answer OptionsOptions Figure 3:An illustration of the two prompting setups we explore in our paper (answer-only and CoT prompting). Both setups include task descriptions and options in the input prompt. The task here isTemporal Sequences. “let’s think step-by-step” (Kojima et al.,2022) to all CoT annotations in the few-shot exemplars. An example of a CoT prompt is shown in Figure3. Language models. We consider three families of language models: Codex ( Chen et al., 2021a), InstructGPT (Ouyang et al.,2022;Brown et al.,2020), and PaLM (Chowdhery et al.,2022). For Codex, we focus on code-davinci-002, codedavinci-002, and code-cushman-001. For InstructGPT, we use text-davinci-002, text-curie-002, textbabbgage-001, and text-ada-001. For PaLM, we use the three available sizes: 8B, 62B, and 540B. Evaluation protocol.We evaluate all language models via greedy decoding (i.e., temperature sampling with temperature parameter⌧=0). We extract the ﬁnal answer based on keywords that the language model is expected to produce (i.e., “the answer is”). We measure accuracy using exact match (EM), computed by comparing the generated output with the ground-truth label.4 4 Results 4.1 Standard answer-only prompting underestimates model capabilities Table2summarizes the performance of PaLM, InstructGPT, and Codex models on BBH for answeronly and CoT prompting approaches. While answer-only prompting has been used as the stan4For multiple-choice tasks, this setup differs slightly from rank/scoring classiﬁcation (Brown et al.,2020;Srivastava et al.,2022;Lampinen et al.,2022). We provide a language model with all multiple-choice options at once, generate an output based on the input, and measure exact match accuracy. dard in many prior work (Brown et al.,2020;Rae et al.,2021;Hoffmann et al.,2022;Srivastava et al., 2022), it typically underestimates model performance on challenging tasks, such as those that require multiple reasoning steps. In the setting reported in (Srivastava et al.,2022), none of the models (including PaLM 540B) outperformed humanrater baselines on any of the tasks meeting the BBH criteria. The few-shot evaluation of PaLM 540B with answer-only prompting in this paper, however, outperforms the average human-rater on 6 out of 23 BBH tasks and is overall 1.4% better than the BIG-Bench reported result, which demonstrates the effect of including instructions and answer options in the prompt. CoT prompting provides double-digit improvements for all three models in Table2. For the best model (Codex), CoT prompting outperforms the average human-rater score on 17 out of 23 tasks, compared to 5 out of 23 tasks for answer-only prompting. Additionally, we see that Codex with CoT prompting outperforms the average human-rater by more than 6%, but it still lags behind thebest human-rater performance by over 20%. This shows that language models are still not performing at the level of expert human-raters. 4.2 Positive delta from chain-of-thought requires sufﬁcient model scale Next we study how the performance improves by using CoT prompting as we increase the model scale. In Figure4, we plot the performance of both CoT and answer-only prompting (no CoT) as a 13006 Figure 9.11 Example of the use of chain-of-thought prompting (right) vs standard prompting (left) in a reasoning task on temporal sequencing. Figure from Suzgun et al. (2023). • Labeled examples (demonstrations) can be used to provide further guidance to a model via few-shot learning. • Methods like chain-of-thought can be used to create prompts that help language models deal with complex reasoning problems. • Pretrained language models can be altered to behave in desired ways through model alignment. • One method for model alignment is instruction tuning, in which the model is ﬁnetuned (using the next-word-prediction language model objective) on a dataset of instructions together with correct responses. Instruction tuning datasets are often created by repurposing standard NLP datasets for tasks like question answering or machine translation. HISTORICAL NOTES 17 Historical Notes Bai, Y ., A. Jones, K. Ndousse, A. Askell, A. Chen, N. DasSarma, D. Drain, S. Fort, D. Ganguli, T. Henighan, N. Joseph, S. Kadavath, J. Kernion, T. Conerly, S. ElShowk, N. Elhage, Z. Hatﬁeld-Dodds, D. Hernandez, T. Hume, S. Johnston, S. Kravec, L. Lovitt, N. Nanda, C. Olsson, D. Amodei, T. Brown, J. Clark, S. McCandlish, C. Olah, B. Mann, and J. Kaplan. 2022. Training a helpful and harmless assistant with reinforcement learning from human feedback. Bianchi, F., M. Suzgun, G. Attanasio, P. Rottger, D. Jurafsky, T. Hashimoto, and J. Zou. 2024. Safety-tuned LLaMAs: Lessons from improving the safety of large language models that follow instructions. ICLR. Bradley, R. A. and M. E. Terry. 1952. Rank analysis of incomplete block designs: I. the method of paired comparisons. Biometrika, 39:324–345. Brown, T., B. Mann, N. Ryder, M. Subbiah, J. Kaplan, P. Dhariwal, A. Neelakantan, P. Shyam, G. Sastry, A. Askell, S. Agarwal, A. Herbert-V oss, G. Krueger, T. Henighan, R. Child, A. Ramesh, D. M. Ziegler, J. Wu, C. Winter, C. Hesse, M. Chen, E. Sigler, M. Litwin, S. Gray, B. Chess, J. Clark, C. Berner, S. McCandlish, A. Radford, I. Sutskever, and D. Amodei. 2020. Language models are few-shot learners. NeurIPS, volume 33. Cao, Y ., Y . Kang, C. Wang, and L. Sun. 2024. Instruction mining: Instruction data selection for tuning large language models. First Conference on Language Modeling. Cheng, M., E. Durmus, and D. Jurafsky. 2023. Marked personas: Using natural language prompts to measure stereotypes in language models. ACL. Cobbe, K., V . Kosaraju, M. Bavarian, M. Chen, H. Jun, L. Kaiser, M. Plappert, J. Tworek, J. Hilton, R. Nakano, C. Hesse, and J. Schulman. 2021. Training veriﬁers to solve math word problems. ArXiv preprint. Cui, G., L. Yuan, N. Ding, G. Yao, B. He, W. Zhu, Y . Ni, G. Xie, R. Xie, Y . Lin, Z. Liu, and M. Sun. 2024. Ultrafeedback: boosting language models with scaled ai feedback. ICML 2024. Ethayarajh, K., H. C. Zhang, and S. Behzad. 2022. Stanford human preferences dataset v2 (shp-2). Gehman, S., S. Gururangan, M. Sap, Y . Choi, and N. A. Smith. 2020. RealToxicityPrompts: Evaluating neural toxic degeneration in language models. Findings of EMNLP. Iyer, S., X. V . Lin, R. Pasunuru, T. Mihaylov, D. Simig, P. Yu, K. Shuster, T. Wang, Q. Liu, P. S. Koura, X. Li, B. O’Horo, G. Pereyra, J. Wang, C. Dewan, A. Celikyilmaz, L. Zettlemoyer, and V . Stoyanov. 2022. Optiml: Scaling language model instruction meta learning through the lens of generalization. ArXiv preprint. Lambert, N., L. Tunstall, N. Rajani, and T. Thrush. 2023. Huggingface h4 stack exchange preference dataset. Longpre, S., L. Hou, T. Vu, A. Webson, H. W. Chung, Y . Tay, D. Zhou, Q. V . Le, B. Zoph, J. Wei, and A. Roberts. 2023. The Flan collection: Designing data and methods for effective instruction tuning. ICML. Mishra, S., D. Khashabi, C. Baral, and H. Hajishirzi. 2022. Cross-task generalization via natural language crowdsourcing instructions. ACL. Ouyang, L., J. Wu, X. Jiang, D. Almeida, C. Wainwright, P. Mishkin, C. Zhang, S. Agarwal, K. Slama, A. Ray, J. Schulman, J. Hilton, F. Kelton, L. Miller, M. Simens, A. Askell, P. Welinder, P. Christiano, J. Leike, and R. Lowe. 2022. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. NeurIPS, volume 35. Rafailov, R., A. Sharma, E. Mitchell, S. Ermon, C. D. Manning, and C. Finn. 2023. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model. NeurIPS. Rajpurkar, P., J. Zhang, K. Lopyrev, and P. Liang. 2016. SQuAD: 100,000+ questions for machine comprehension of text. EMNLP. Sheng, E., K.-W. Chang, P. Natarajan, and N. Peng. 2019. The woman worked as a babysitter: On biases in language generation. EMNLP. Singh, S., F. Vargus, D. D’souza, B. F. Karlsson, A. Mahendiran, W.-Y . Ko, H. Shandilya, J. Patel, D. Mataciunas, L. O’Mahony, M. Zhang, R. Hettiarachchi, J. Wilson, M. Machado, L. S. Moura, D. Krzemi ´nski, H. Fadaei, I. Erg ¨un, I. Okoh, A. Alaagib, O. Mudannayake, Z. Alyafeai, V . M. Chien, S. Ruder, S. Guthikonda, E. A. Alghamdi, S. Gehrmann, N. Muennighoff, M. Bartolo, J. Kreutzer, A. ¨U ¨Ust¨un, M. Fadaee, and S. Hooker. 2024. Aya dataset: An open-access collection for multilingual instruction tuning. ArXiv preprint. Stiennon, N., L. Ouyang, J. Wu, D. M. Ziegler, R. Lowe, C. V oss, A. Radford, D. Amodei, and P. Christiano. 2020. Learning to summarize from human feedback. Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. Sutton, R. S. and A. G. Barto. 1998. Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction. MIT Press. Suzgun, M., N. Scales, N. Sch ¨arli, S. Gehrmann, Y . Tay, H. W. Chung, A. Chowdhery, Q. Le, E. Chi, D. Zhou, and J. Wei. 2023. Challenging BIG-bench tasks and whether chain-of-thought can solve them. ACL Findings. Wang, Y ., S. Mishra, P. Alipoormolabashi, Y . Kordi, A. Mirzaei, A. Naik, A. Ashok, A. S. Dhanasekaran, A. Arunkumar, D. Stap, E. Pathak, G. Karamanolakis, H. Lai, I. Purohit, I. Mondal, J. Anderson, K. Kuznia, K. Doshi, K. K. Pal, M. Patel, M. Moradshahi, M. Parmar, M. Purohit, N. Varshney, P. R. Kaza, P. Verma, R. S. Puri, R. Karia, S. Doshi, S. K. Sampat, S. Mishra, S. Reddy A, S. Patro, T. Dixit, and X. Shen. 2022. SuperNaturalInstructions: Generalization via declarative instructions on 1600+ NLP tasks. EMNLP. Wang, Z., Y . Dong, J. Zeng, V . Adams, M. N. Sreedhar, D. Egert, O. Delalleau, J. Scowcroft, N. Kant, A. Swope, and O. Kuchaiev. 2024. HelpSteer: Multi-attribute helpfulness dataset for SteerLM. NAACL HLT. Wei, J., X. Wang, D. Schuurmans, M. Bosma, F. Xia, E. Chi, Q. V . Le, D. Zhou, et al. 2022. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. NeurIPS, volume 35. Ziegler, D. M., N. Stiennon, J. Wu, T. B. Brown, A. Radford, D. Amodei, P. Christiano, and G. Irving. 2019. Finetuning language models from human preferences. ArXiv, abs/1909.08593.